In Praise of Computer Organization and Design: The Hardware/ Software Interface, Sixth Edition “Textbook selection is often a frustrating act of compromise—pedagogy, content coverage, quality of exposition, level of rigor, cost. Computer Organization and Design is the rare book that hits all the right notes across the board, without compromise. It is not only the premier computer organization textbook, it is a shining example of what all computer science textbooks could and should be.” —Michael Goldweber, Xavier University “I have been using Computer Organization and Design for years, from the very first edition. This new edition is yet another outstanding improvement on an already classic text. The evolution from desktop computing to mobile computing to Big Data brings new coverage of embedded processors such as the ARM, new material on how software and hardware interact to increase performance, and cloud computing. All this without sacrificing the fundamentals.” —Ed Harcourt, St. Lawrence University “To Millennials: Computer Organization and Design is the computer architecture book you should keep on your (virtual) bookshelf. The book is both old and new, because it develops venerable principles—Moore’s Law, abstraction, common case fast, redundancy, memory hierarchies, parallelism, and pipelining—but illustrates them with contemporary designs.” —Mark D. Hill, University of Wisconsin-Madison “The new edition of Computer Organization and Design keeps pace with advances in emerging embedded and many-core (GPU) systems, where tablets and smartphones will/are quickly becoming our new desktops. This text acknowledges these changes, but continues to provide a rich foundation of the fundamentals in computer organization and design which will be needed for the designers of hardware and software that power this new class of devices and systems.” —Dave Kaeli, Northeastern University “Computer Organization and Design provides more than an introduction to computer architecture. It prepares the reader for the changes necessary to meet the ever- increasing performance needs of mobile systems and big data processing at a time that difficulties in semiconductor scaling are making all systems power constrained. In this new era for computing, hardware and software must be co-designed and system-level architecture is as critical as component-level optimizations.” —Christos Kozyrakis, Stanford University “Patterson and Hennessy brilliantly address the issues in ever-changing computer hardware architectures, emphasizing on interactions among hardware and software components at various abstraction levels. By interspersing I/O and parallelism concepts with a variety of mechanisms in hardware and software throughout the book, the new edition achieves an excellent holistic presentation of computer architecture for the post- PC era. This book is an essential guide to hardware and software professionals facing energy efficiency and parallelization challenges in Tablet PC to Cloud computing.” —Jae C. Oh, Syracuse University

R I S C - V E D I T I O N Computer Organization and Design T H E H A R D W A R E S O F T W A R E I N T E R F A C E SECOND EDITION

David A. Patterson has been teaching computer architecture at the University of California, Berkeley, since joining the faculty in 1977, where he held the Pardee Chair of Computer Science. His teaching has been honored by the Distinguished Teaching Award from the University of California, the Karlstrom Award from ACM, and the Mulligan Education Medal and Undergraduate Teaching Award from IEEE. Patterson received the IEEE Technical Achievement Award and the ACM Eckert-Mauchly Award for contributions to RISC, and he shared the IEEE Johnson Information Storage Award for contributions to RAID. He also shared the IEEE John von Neumann Medal and the C & C Prize with John Hennessy. Like his coauthor, Patterson is a Fellow of both AAAS organizations, the Computer History Museum, ACM, and IEEE, and he was elected to the National Academy of Engineering, the National Academy of Sciences, and the Silicon Valley Engineering Hall of Fame. He served as chair of the CS division in the Berkeley EECS department, as chair of the Computing Research Association, and as President of ACM. This record led to Distinguished Service Awards from ACM, CRA, and SIGARCH. He received the Tapia Achievement Award for Civic Science and Diversifying Computing and shared the 2017 ACM A. M. Turing Award with Hennessy. At Berkeley, Patterson led the design and implementation of RISC I, likely the first VLSI reduced instruction set computer, and the foundation of the commercial SPARC architecture. He was a leader of the Redundant Arrays of Inexpensive Disks (RAID) project, which led to dependable storage systems from many companies. He was also involved in the Network of Workstations (NOW) project, which led to cluster technology used by Internet companies and later to cloud computing. These projects earned four dissertation awards from ACM. In 2016, he became Professor Emeritus at Berkeley and a Distinguished Engineer at Google, where he works on domain specific architecture for machine learning. He is also the Vice Chair of RISC-V International and the Director of the RISC-V International Open Source Laboratory. John L. Hennessy was a Professor of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science at Stanford University, where he has been a member of the faculty since 1977 and was, from 2000 to 2016, its tenth President. Hennessy is a Fellow of the IEEE and ACM; a member of the National Academy of Engineering, the National Academy of Science, and the American Philosophical Society; and a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. Among his many awards are the 2001 Eckert-Mauchly Award for his contributions to RISC technology, the 2001 Seymour Cray Computer Engineering Award, and the 2000 John von Neumann Award, which he shared with David Patterson. In 2017, they shared the ACM A. M. Turing Award. He has also received seven honorary doctorates. In 1981, he started the MIPS project at Stanford with a handful of graduate students. After completing the project in 1984, he took a leave from the university to cofound MIPS Computer Systems (now MIPS Technologies), which developed one of the first commercial RISC microprocessors. As of 2006, over 2 billion MIPS microprocessors have been shipped in devices ranging from video games and palmtop computers to laser printers and network switches. Hennessy subsequently led the DASH (Director Architecture for Shared Memory) project, which prototyped the first scalable cache coherent multiprocessor; many of the key ideas have been adopted in modern multiprocessors. In addition to his technical activities and university responsibilities, he has continued to work with numerous start-ups, both as an early-stage advisor and an investor. He is currently Director of Knight-Hennessy Scholars and serves as non-executive chairman of Alphabet.

R I S C - V E D I T I O N Computer Organization and Design T H E H A R D W A R E S O F T W A R E I N T E R F A C E SECOND EDITION David A. Patterson University of California, Berkeley Google, Inc John L. Hennessy Stanford University

Morgan Kaufmann is an imprint of Elsevier 50 Hampshire Street, 5th Floor, Cambridge, MA 02139, United States Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to seek permission, further information about the Publisher’s permissions policies and our arrangements with organizations such as the Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency, can be found at our website: www.elsevier.com/permissions. This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the Publisher (other than as may be noted herein). Notices Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and experience broaden our understanding, changes in research methods, professional practices, or medical treatment may become necessary. Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in evaluating and using any information, methods, compounds, or experiments described herein. In using such information or methods they should be mindful of their own safety and the safety of others, including parties for whom they have a professional responsibility. To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors, assume any liability for any injury and/ or damage to persons or property as a matter of products liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, products, instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein. RISC-V and the RISC-V logo are registered trademarks managed by the RISC-V Foundation, used under permission of the RISC-V Foundation. All rights reserved. This publication is independent of the RISC-V Foundation, which is not affiliated with the publisher and the RISC-V Foundation does not authorize, sponsor, endorse or otherwise approve this publication. All material relating to ARM® technology has been reproduced with permission from ARM Limited, and should only be used for education purposes. All ARM-based models shown or referred to in the text must not be used, reproduced or distributed for commercial purposes, and in no event shall purchasing this textbook be construed as granting you or any third party, expressly or by implication, estoppel or otherwise, a license to use any other ARM technology or know how. Materials provided by ARM are copyright © ARM Limited (or its affi liates). British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress ISBN: 978-0-12-820331-6 For Information on all Morgan Kaufmann publications visit our website at https://www.elsevier.com/books-and-journals Publisher: Katey Birtcher Senior Acquisitions Editor: Stephen R. Merken Content Development Specialist: Beth LoGiudice Project Manager: Janish Paul Designer: Patrick Ferguson Typeset by TNQ Technologies

To Linda, who has been, is, and always will be the love of my life

Contents Preface  xi C H A P T E R S Computer Abstractions and Technology  2 1.1 Introduction  3 1.2 Seven Great Ideas in Computer Architecture  10 1.3 Below Your Program  13 1.4 Under the Covers  16 1.5 Technologies for Building Processors and Memory  25 1.6 Performance  29 1.7 The Power Wall  40 1.8 The Sea Change: The Switch from Uniprocessors to Multiprocessors  43 1.9 Real Stuff: Benchmarking the Intel Core i7  46 1.10 Going Faster: Matrix Multiply in Python  49 1.11 Fallacies and Pitfalls  50 1.12 Concluding Remarks  53 1.13 Historical Perspective and Further Reading  55 1.14 Self-Study  55 1.15 Exercises  59 Instructions: Language of the Computer  66 2.1 Introduction  68 2.2 Operations of the Computer Hardware  69 2.3 Operands of the Computer Hardware  73 2.4 Signed and Unsigned Numbers  80 2.5 Representing Instructions in the Computer  87 2.6 Logical Operations  95 2.7 Instructions for Making Decisions  98 2.8 Supporting Procedures in Computer Hardware  104 2.9 Communicating with People  114 2.10 RISC-V Addressing for Wide Immediates and Addresses  120 2.11 Parallelism and Instructions: Synchronization  128 2.12 Translating and Starting a Program  131 2.13 A C Sort Example to Put it All Together  140

 Contents vii 2.14 Arrays versus Pointers  148 2.15 Advanced Material: Compiling C and Interpreting Java  151 2.16 Real Stuff: MIPS Instructions  152 2.17 Real Stuff: ARMv7 (32-bit) Instructions  153 2.18 Real Stuff: ARMv8 (64-bit) Instructions  157 2.19 Real Stuff: x86 Instructions  158 2.20 Real Stuff: The Rest of the RISC-V Instruction Set  167 2.21 Going Faster: Matrix Multiply in C  168 2.22 Fallacies and Pitfalls  170 2.23 Concluding Remarks  172 2.24 Historical Perspective and Further Reading  174 2.25 Self-Study  175 2.26 Exercises  178 Arithmetic for Computers  188 3.1 Introduction  190 3.2 Addition and Subtraction  190 3.3 Multiplication  193 3.4 Division  199 3.5 Floating Point  208 3.6 Parallelism and Computer Arithmetic: Subword Parallelism  233 3.7 Real Stuff: Streaming SIMD Extensions and Advanced Vector Extensions in x86  234 3.8 Going Faster: Subword Parallelism and Matrix Multiply  236 3.9 Fallacies and Pitfalls  238 3.10 Concluding Remarks  241 3.11 Historical Perspective and Further Reading  242 3.12 Self-Study  242 3.13 Exercises  246 The Processor  252 4.1 Introduction  254 4.2 Logic Design Conventions  258 4.3 Building a Datapath  261 4.4 A Simple Implementation Scheme  269 4.5 Multicyle Implementation  282 4.6 An Overview of Pipelining  283 4.7 Pipelined Datapath and Control  296 4.8 Data Hazards: Forwarding versus Stalling  313 4.9 Control Hazards  325 4.10 Exceptions  333 4.11 Parallelism via Instructions  340 4.12 Putting it All Together: The Intel Core i7 6700 and ARM Cortex-A53  354

viii Contents 4.13 Going Faster: Instruction-Level Parallelism and Matrix Multiply  363 4.14 Advanced Topic: An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language to Describe and Model a Pipeline and More Pipelining Illustrations  365 4.15 Fallacies and Pitfalls  365 4.16 Concluding Remarks  367 4.17 Historical Perspective and Further Reading  368 4.18 Self-Study  368 4.19 Exercises  369 Large and Fast: Exploiting Memory Hierarchy  386 5.1 Introduction  388 5.2 Memory Technologies  392 5.3 The Basics of Caches  398 5.4 Measuring and Improving Cache Performance  412 5.5 Dependable Memory Hierarchy  431 5.6 Virtual Machines  436 5.7 Virtual Memory  440 5.8 A Common Framework for Memory Hierarchy  464 5.9 Using a Finite-State Machine to Control a Simple Cache  470 5.10 Parallelism and Memory Hierarchy: Cache Coherence  475 5.11 Parallelism and Memory Hierarchy: Redundant Arrays of Inexpensive Disks  479 5.12 Advanced Material: Implementing Cache Controllers  480 5.13 Real Stuff: The ARM Cortex-A8 and Intel Core i7 Memory Hierarchies  480 5.14 Real Stuff: The Rest of the RISC-V System and Special Instructions  486 5.15 Going Faster: Cache Blocking and Matrix Multiply  488 5.16 Fallacies and Pitfalls  489 5.17 Concluding Remarks  494 5.18 Historical Perspective and Further Reading  495 5.19 Self-Study  495 5.20 Exercises  499 Parallel Processors from Client to Cloud  518 6.1 Introduction  520 6.2 The Difficulty of Creating Parallel Processing Programs  522 6.3 SISD, MIMD, SIMD, SPMD, and Vector  527 6.4 Hardware Multithreading  534 6.5 Multicore and Other Shared Memory Multiprocessors  537 6.6 Introduction to Graphics Processing Units  542 6.7 Domain-Specific Architectures  549 6.8 Clusters, Warehouse Scale Computers, and Other Message-Passing Multiprocessors  552

 Contents ix 6.9 Introduction to Multiprocessor Network Topologies  557 6.10 Communicating to the Outside World: Cluster Networking  561 6.11 Multiprocessor Benchmarks and Performance Models  561 6.12 Real Stuff: Benchmarking the Google TPUv3 Supercomputer and an NVIDIA Volta GPU Cluster  572 6.13 Going Faster: Multiple Processors and Matrix Multiply  580 6.14 Fallacies and Pitfalls  583 6.15 Concluding Remarks  585 6.16 Historical Perspective and Further Reading  587 6.17 Self-Study  588 6.18 Exercises  590 A P P E N D I X A The Basics of Logic Design  A-2 A.1 Introduction  A-3 A.2 Gates, Truth Tables, and Logic Equations  A-4 A.3 Combinational Logic  A-9 A.4 Using a Hardware Description Language  A-20 A.5 Constructing a Basic Arithmetic Logic Unit  A-26 A.6 Faster Addition: Carry Lookahead  A-37 A.7 Clocks  A-47 A.8 Memory Elements: Flip-Flops, Latches, and Registers  A-49 A.9 Memory Elements: SRAMs and DRAMs  A-57 A.10 Finite-State Machines  A-66 A.11 Timing Methodologies  A-71 A.12 Field Programmable Devices  A-77 A.13 Concluding Remarks  A-78 A.14 Exercises  A-79 Index  I-1 O N L I N E C O N T E N T Graphics and Computing GPUs  B-2 B.1 Introduction  B-3 B.2 GPU System Architectures  B-7 B.3 Programming GPUs  B-12 B.4 Multithreaded Multiprocessor Architecture  B-25 B.5 Parallel Memory System  B-36 B.6 Floating-point Arithmetic  B-41 B

x Contents B.7 Real Stuff: The NVIDIA GeForce 8800  B-46 B.8 Real Stuff: Mapping Applications to GPUs  B-55 B.9 Fallacies and Pitfalls  B-72 B.10 Concluding Remarks  B-76 B.11 Historical Perspective and Further Reading  B-77 Mapping Control to Hardware  C-2 C.1 Introduction  C-3 C.2 Implementing Combinational Control Units  C-4 C.3 Implementing Finite-State Machine Control  C-8 C.4 Implementing the Next-State Function with a Sequencer  C-22 C.5 Translating a Microprogram to Hardware  C-28 C.6 Concluding Remarks  C-32 C.7 Exercises  C-33 Survey of Instruction Set Architectures  D-2 D.1 Introduction  D-3 D.2 A Survey of RISC Architectures for Desktop, Server, and Embedded Computers  D-4 D.3 The Intel 80×86  D-30 D.4 The VAX Architecture  D-50 D.5 The IBM 360/370 Architecture for Mainframe Computers  D-68 D.6 Historical Perspective and References  D-74 Glossary  G-1 Further Reading  FR-1 C D

Preface The most beautiful thing we can experience is the mysterious. It is the source of all true art and science. Albert Einstein, What I Believe, 1930 About This Book We believe that learning in computer science and engineering should reflect the current state of the field, as well as introduce the principles that are shaping computing. We also feel that readers in every specialty of computing need to appreciate the organizational paradigms that determine the capabilities, performance, energy, and, ultimately, the success of computer systems. Modern computer technology requires professionals of every computing specialty to understand both hardware and software. The interaction between hardware and software at a variety of levels also offers a framework for understanding the fundamentals of computing. Whether your primary interest is hardware or software, computer science or electrical engineering, the central ideas in computer organization and design are the same. Thus, our emphasis in this book is to show the relationship between hardware and software and to focus on the concepts that are the basis for current computers. The recent switch from uniprocessor to multicore microprocessors confirmed the soundness of this perspective, given since the first edition. While programmers could ignore the advice and rely on computer architects, compiler writers, and silicon engineers to make their programs run faster or be more energy-efficient without change, that era is over. For programs to run faster, they must become parallel. While the goal of many researchers is to make it possible for programmers to be unaware of the underlying parallel nature of the hardware they are programming, it will take many years to realize this vision. Our view is that for at least the next decade, most programmers are going to have to understand the hardware/software interface if they want programs to run efficiently on parallel computers. The audience for this book includes those with little experience in assembly language or logic design who need to understand basic computer organization as well as readers with backgrounds in assembly language and/or logic design who want to learn how to design a computer or understand how a system works and why it performs as it does.

xii Preface About the Other Book Some readers may be familiar with Computer Architecture: A Quantitative Approach, popularly known as Hennessy and Patterson. (This book in turn is often called Patterson and Hennessy.) Our motivation in writing the earlier book was to describe the principles of computer architecture using solid engineering fundamentals and quantitative cost/performance tradeoffs. We used an approach that combined examples and measurements, based on commercial systems, to create realistic design experiences. Our goal was to demonstrate that computer architecture could be learned using quantitative methodologies instead of a descriptive approach. It was intended for the serious computing professional who wanted a detailed understanding of computers. A majority of the readers for this book do not plan to become computer architects. The performance and energy efficiency of future software systems will be dramatically affected, however, by how well software designers understand the basic hardware techniques at work in a system. Thus, compiler writers, operating system designers, database programmers, and most other software engineers need a firm grounding in the principles presented in this book. Similarly, hardware designers must understand clearly the effects of their work on software applications. Thus, we knew that this book had to be much more than a subset of the material in Computer Architecture, and the material was extensively revised to match the different audience. We were so happy with the result that the subsequent editions of Computer Architecture were revised to remove most of the introductory material; hence, there is much less overlap today than with the first editions of both books. Why a RISC-V Edition? The choice of instruction set architecture is clearly critical to the pedagogy of a computer architecture textbook. We didn’t want an instruction set that required describing unnecessary baroque features for someone’s first instruction set, no matter how popular it is. Ideally, your initial instruction set should be an exemplar, just like your first love. Surprisingly, you remember both fondly. Since there were so many choices at the time, for the first edition of Computer Architecture: A Quantitative Approach, we invented our own RISC-style instruction set. Given the growing popularity and the simple elegance of the MIPS instruction set, we switched to it for the first edition of this book and to later editions of the other book. MIPS has served us and our readers well. It’s been many years since we made that switch, and while billions of chips that use MIPS continue to be shipped, they are typically in found embedded devices where the instruction set is nearly invisible. Thus, for a while now it’s been hard to find a real computer on which readers can download and run MIPS programs. The good news is that an open instruction set that adheres closely to the RISC principles has recently debuted, and it is rapidly gaining a following. RISC-V, which was developed originally at UC Berkeley, not only cleans up the quirks of the MIPS 

 Preface xiii instruction set, but it offers a simple, elegant, modern take on what instruction sets should look like in 2020. Moreover, because it is not proprietary, there are open-source RISC-V simulators, compilers, debuggers, and so on easily available and even open-source RISC-V implementations available written in hardware description languages. Moreover, 2020 saw the introduction of low-cost boards based on RISC-V that are the equivalent of the Raspberry Pi, which is not the case for MIPS. Readers will not only benefit from studying these RISC-V designs, they will be able to modify them and go through the implementation process in order to understand the impact of their hypothetical changes on performance, die size, and energy. This is an exciting opportunity for the computing industry as well as for education, and thus at the time of this writing more than 300 companies have joined the RISC-V foundation. This sponsor list includes virtually all the major players except for ARM and Intel, including Alibaba, Amazon, AMD, Google, Hewlett Packard Enterprise, IBM, Microsoft, NVIDIA, Qualcomm, Samsung, and Western Digital. It is for these reasons that we wrote a RISC-V edition of this book, and we switched Computer Architecture: A Quantitative Approach to RISC-V as well. With this edition of the RISC-V version, we switched from 64-bit RV64 to 32-bit RV32. Instructors found that the extra complexity of a 64-bit instruction set made it harder on the students. RV32 reduces the core architecture by 10 instructions— dropping ld, sd, lwu, addw, subw, addwi, sllw, srlw, sllwiw, srliw—and they don’t have to understand operations on the lower 32 bits of a 64-bit register. We also can largely ignore doublewords and just use words in the text. in this edition we also hid the odd-looking SB and UJ formats until Chapter 4. We explain the hardware savings of the swirled bit orderings in the immediate fields of SB and UJ later since that chapter is where we show the datapath hardware. Just as we did for the sixth MIPS addition, we added an online section showing a multiple-clock- cycle implementation for this edition, but we modified it to match RISC-V. Some faculty prefer to go through the multicycle implementation after the single-cycle implementation before introducing pipelining. The only changes for the RISC-V edition from the MIPS edition are those associated with the change in instruction sets, which primarily affects Chapter 2, Chapter 3, the virtual memory section in Chapter 5, and the short VMIPS example in Chapter 6. In Chapter 4, we switched to RISC-V instructions, changed several figures, and added a few “Elaboration” sections, but the changes were simpler than we had feared. Chapter 1 and most of the appendices are virtually unchanged. The extensive online documentation and combined with the magnitude of RISC-V make it difficult to come up with a replacement for the MIPS version of Appendix A (“Assemblers, Linkers, and the SPIM Simulator” in the MIPS Sixth Edition). Instead, Chapters 2, 3, and 5 include quick overviews of the hundreds of RISC-V instructions outside of the core RISC-V instructions that we cover in detail in the rest of the book. The current plan is to continue revisiing both the MIPS and RISC-V versions of this book, as we did in 2020.

xiv Preface Changes for the Second Edition There is arguably been more change in the technology and business of computer architecture since the fifth edition than there were for the first five: ●  The slowing of Moore’s Law. After 50 years of biannual doubling of the number of transistors per chip, Gordon Moore’s prediction no longer holds. Semiconductor technology will still improve, but more slowly and less predictably than in the past. ●  The rise of Domain Specific Architectures (DSA). In part due to the slowing of Moore’s Law and in part due to the end of Dennard Scaling, general purpose processors are only improving a few percent per year. Moreover, Amdahl’s Law limits the practical benefit of increasing the number of processors per chip. In 2020, it is widely believed that the most promising path forward is DSA. It doesn’t try to run everything well like general purpose processors, but focuses on running programs of one domain much better than conventional CPUs. ●  Microarchitecture as a security attack surface. Spectre demonstrated that speculative out-of-order execution and hardware multithreading make timing based side-channel attacks practical. Moreover, these are not due to bugs that can be fixed, but a fundamental challenge to this style of processor design. ●  Open instruction sets and open source implementations. The opportunities and impact of open source software have come to computer architecture. Open instruction sets like RISC-V enables organizations to build their own processors without first negotiating a license, which has enabled open-source implementations that are shared to freely download and use as well as proprietary implementations of RISC-V. Open-source software and hardware are a boon to academic research and instruction, allowing students to see and enhance industrial strength technology. ●  The re-virticalization of the information technology industry. Cloud computing has led to no more than a half-dozen companies that provide computing infrastructure for everyone to use. Much like IBM in the 1960s and 1970s, these companies determine both the software stack and the hardware that they deploy. The changes above have led to some of these “hyperscalers” developing their own DSA and RISC-V chips for deployment in their clouds.

 Preface xv Chapter or Appendix Sections Software focus Hardware focus 1. Computer Abstractions and Technology 1.1 to 1.12 1.13 (History) 3. Arithmetic for Computers 3.1 to 3.5 3.11 (History) 4. The Processor 4.1 (Overview) 4.2 (Logic Conventions) 4.3 to 4.4 (Simple Implementation) D. RISC Instruction-Set Architectures D.1 to D.6 2. Instructions: Language of the Computer 2.1 to 2.14 2.15 (Compilers & Java) 2.16 to 2.22 2.23 (History) 4.6 (Pipelining Overview) 4.5 (Multicycle Implementation) 4.7 (Pipelined Datapath) 4.8 to 4.10 (Hazards, Exceptions) 4.11 to 4.13 (Parallel, Real Stuff) 4.17 (History) A. The Basics of Logic Design A.1 to A.13 C. Mapping Control to Hardware C.1 to C.6 B.1 to B.11 Read carefully Review or read Read if have time Read for culture Reference 4.14 (Verilog Pipeline Control) 5. Large and Fast: Exploiting Memory Hierarchy 5.1 to 5.10 5.17 (History) 4.15 to 4.16 (Fallacies) 6. Parallel Process from Client to Cloud 6.1 to 6.9 6.10 (Clusters) 6.11 to 6.15 6.16 (History) 3.6 to 3.8 (Subword Parallelism) 3.9 to 3.10 (Fallacies) 5.13 to 5.16 B. Graphics Processor Units 5.12 (Verilog Cache Controller) 5.11 (Redundant Arrays of Inexpensive Disks)

xvi Preface The second edition of COD (RISC-V edition) reflects these recent changes, updates all the examples and figures, responds to requests of instructors, plus adds a pedagogic improvement inspired by textbooks I used to help my grandchildren with their math classes. ●  The Going Faster section is now in every chapter. It starts with a Python version in Chapter 1, whose poor performance inspires learning C and then rewriting matrix multiply in C in Chapter 2. The remaining chapters accelerate matrix multiply by leveraging data-level parallelism, instruction-level parallelism, thread-level parallelism, and by adjusting memory accesses to match the memory hierarchy of a modern server. This computer has 512-bit SIMD operations, speculative out-of-order execution, three levels of caches, and 48 cores. All four optimizations add only 21 lines of C code yet speedup matrix multiply by almost 50,000, cutting it from nearly 6 hours in Python to less than 1 second in optimized C. If I were a student again, this running example would inspire me to use C and learn the underlying hardware concepts of this book. ●  With this edition, every chapter has a Self-Study section that asks thought provoking questions and supplies the answers afterwards to help you evaluate if you follow the material on your own. ●  Besides explaining that Moore’s Law and Dennard Scaling no longer hold, we’ve de-emphasized Moore’s Law as a change agent that was prominent in the fifth edition. ●  Chapter 2 has more material to emphasize that binary data has no inherent meaning—the program determines the data type—not an easy concept for beginners to grasp. ●  Chapter 2 also includes a short description of the MIPS as a contrasting instruction set to RISC-V alongside ARMv7, ARMv8, and x86. (There is also a companion version of this book based on MIPS instead of RISC-V, and we’re updating that with the other changes as well.) ●  The benchmark example of Chapter 2 is upgraded to SPEC2017 from SPEC2006. ●  At instructors’ request, we’ve restored the multi-cycle implementation of RISC-V as an online section in Chapter 4 between the single-cycle implementation and the pipelined implementation. Some instructors find these three steps an easier path to teach pipelining. ●  The Putting It All Together examples of Chapters 4 and 5 were updated to the recent ARM A53 microarchitecture and the Intel i7 6700 Skyelake microarchitecture. ●  The Fallacies and Pitfalls Sections of Chapters 5 and 6 added pitfalls around hardware security attacks of Row Hammer and Spectre. ●  Chapter 6 has a new section introducing DSAs using Google’s Tensor Processing Unit (TPU) version 1. Chapter 6’s Putting it All Together section 

 Preface xvii is updated to compare Google’s TPUv3 DSA supercomputer to a cluster of NVIDIA Volta GPUs. Finally, we updated all the exercises in the book. While some elements changed, we have preserved useful book elements from prior editions. To make the book work better as a reference, we still place definitions of new terms in the margins at their first occurrence. The book element called “Understanding Program Performance” sections helps readers understand the performance of their programs and how to improve it, just as the “Hardware/ Software Interface” book element helped readers understand the tradeoffs at this interface. “The Big Picture” section remains so that the reader sees the forest despite all the trees. “Check Yourself” sections help readers to confirm their comprehension of the material on the first time through with answers provided at the end of each chapter. This edition still includes the green RISC-V reference card, which was inspired by the “Green Card” of the IBM System/360. This card has been updated and should be a handy reference when writing RISC-V assembly language programs. Instructor Support We have collected a great deal of material to help instructors teach courses using this book. Solutions to exercises, figures from the book, lecture slides, and other materials are available to instructors who register with the publisher. In addition, the companion Web site provides links to a free RISC-V software. Check the publisher’s website for more information: https://textbooks.elsevier.com/web/manuals.aspx?isbn=9780128203316 Concluding Remarks If you read the following acknowledgments section, you will see that we went to great lengths to correct mistakes. Since a book goes through many printings, we have the opportunity to make even more corrections. If you uncover any remaining, resilient bugs, please contact the publisher. This edition is the fourth break in the long-standing collaboration between Hennessy and Patterson, which started in 1989. The demands of running one of the world’s great universities meant that President Hennessy could no longer had the tme the substantial commitment to create a new edition. The remaining author felt once again like a tightrope walker without a safety net. Hence, the people in the acknowledgments and Berkeley colleagues played an even larger role in shaping the contents of this book. Nevertheless, this time around there is only one author to blame for the new material in what you are about to read. Acknowledgments for the Second Edition With every edition of this book, we are very fortunate to receive help from many readers, reviewers, and contributors. Each of these people has helped to make this book better.

xviii Preface We are grateful for the assistance of Khaled Benkrid and his colleagues at ARM Ltd., who carefully reviewed the ARM-related material and provided helpful feedback. Special thanks goes to Dr. Rimas Avizenis, who developed the various versions of matrix multiply and supplied the performance numbers as well. I deeply appreciate his continued help after he has graduated from UC Berkeley. As I worked with his father while I was a graduate student at UCLA, it was a nice symmetry to work with Rimas when he was a graduate student at UC Berkeley. I also wish to thank my longtime collaborator Randy Katz of UC Berkeley, who helped develop the concept of great ideas in computer architecture as part of the extensive revision of an undergraduate class that we did together. I’d like to thank David Kirk, John Nickolls, and their colleagues at NVIDIA (Michael Garland, John Montrym, Doug Voorhies, Lars Nyland, Erik Lindholm, Paulius Micikevicius, Massimiliano Fatica, Stuart Oberman, and Vasily Volkov) for writing the first in-depth appendix on GPUs. I’d like to express again my appreciation to Jim Larus, recently named Dean of the School of Computer and Communications Science at EPFL, for his willingness in contributing his expertise on assembly language programming, as well as for welcoming readers of this book with regard to using the simulator he developed and maintains. I am also very grateful to Jason Bakos of the University of South Carolina, who updated and created new exercises, based on the exercises created by Perry Alexander (The University of Kansas); Javier Bruguera (Universidade de Santiago de Compostela); Matthew Farrens (University of California, Davis); Zachary Kurmas (Grand Valley State University); David Kaeli (Northeastern University); Nicole Kaiyan (University of Adelaide); John Oliver (Cal Poly, San Luis Obispo); Milos Prvulovic (Georgia Tech); Jichuan Chang (Google); Jacob Leverich (Stanford); Kevin Lim (Hewlett-Packard); and Partha Ranganathan (Google). Additional thanks goes to Jason Bakos for updating the lecture slides, based on updated slides from Peter Ashenden (Ashenden Design Pty Ltd). I am grateful to the many instructors who have answered the publisher’s surveys, reviewed our proposals, and attended focus groups. They include the following individuals: Focus Groups: Bruce Barton (Suffolk County Community College), Jeff Braun (Montana Tech), Ed Gehringer (North Carolina State), Michael Goldweber (Xavier University), Ed Harcourt (St. Lawrence University), Mark Hill (University of Wisconsin, Madison), Patrick Homer (University of Arizona), Norm Jouppi (HP Labs), Dave Kaeli (Northeastern University), Christos Kozyrakis (Stanford University), Jae C. Oh (Syracuse University), Lu Peng (LSU), Milos Prvulovic (Georgia Tech), Partha Ranganathan (HP Labs), David Wood (University of Wisconsin), Craig Zilles (University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign). Surveys and Reviews: Mahmoud Abou-Nasr (Wayne State University), Perry Alexander (The University of Kansas), Behnam Arad (Sacramento State University), Hakan Aydin (George Mason University), Hussein Badr (State University of New York at Stony Brook), Mac Baker (Virginia Military Institute), Ron Barnes (George Mason University), Douglas Blough (Georgia Institute of Technology), Kevin Bolding (Seattle Pacific University), Miodrag Bolic (University of Ottawa), John Bonomo 

 Preface xix (Westminster College), Jeff Braun (Montana Tech), Tom Briggs (Shippensburg University), Mike Bright (Grove City College), Scott Burgess (Humboldt State University), Fazli Can (Bilkent University), Warren R. Carithers (Rochester Institute of Technology), Bruce Carlton (Mesa Community College), Nicholas Carter (University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign), Anthony Cocchi (The City University of New York), Don Cooley (Utah State University), Gene Cooperman (Northeastern University), Robert D. Cupper (Allegheny College), Amy Csizmar Dalal (Carleton College), Daniel Dalle (Université de Sherbrooke), Edward W. Davis (North Carolina State University), Nathaniel J. Davis (Air Force Institute of Technology), Molisa Derk (Oklahoma City University), Andrea Di Blas (Stanford University), Nathan B. Doge (The University of Texas at Dallas), Derek Eager (University of Saskatchewan), Ata Elahi (Souther Connecticut State University), Ernest Ferguson (Northwest Missouri State University), Rhonda Kay Gaede (The University of Alabama), Etienne M. Gagnon (L’Université du Québec à Montréal), Costa Gerousis (Christopher Newport University), Paul Gillard (Memorial University of Newfoundland), Michael Goldweber (Xavier University), Georgia Grant (College of San Mateo), Paul V. Gratz (Texas A&M University), Merrill Hall (The Master’s College), Tyson Hall (Southern Adventist University), Ed Harcourt (St. Lawrence University), Justin E. Harlow (University of South Florida), Paul F. Hemler (Hampden-Sydney College), Jayantha Herath (St. Cloud State University), Martin Herbordt (Boston University), Steve J. Hodges (Cabrillo College), Kenneth Hopkinson (Cornell University), Bill Hsu (San Francisco State University), Dalton Hunkins (St. Bonaventure University), Baback Izadi (State University of New York—New Paltz), Reza Jafari, Abbas Javadtalab (Concordia University), Robert W. Johnson (Colorado Technical University), Bharat Joshi (University of North Carolina, Charlotte), Nagarajan Kandasamy (Drexel University), Rajiv Kapadia, Ryan Kastner (University of California, Santa Barbara), E.J. Kim (Texas A&M University), Jihong Kim (Seoul National University), Jim Kirk (Union University), Geoffrey S. Knauth (Lycoming College), Manish M. Kochhal (Wayne State), Suzan Koknar-Tezel (Saint Joseph’s University), Angkul Kongmunvattana (Columbus State University), April Kontostathis (Ursinus College), Christos Kozyrakis (Stanford University), Danny Krizanc (Wesleyan University), Ashok Kumar, S. Kumar (The University of Texas), Zachary Kurmas (Grand Valley State University), Adrian Lauf (University of Louisville), Robert N. Lea (University of Houston), Alvin Lebeck (Duke University), Baoxin Li (Arizona State University), Li Liao (University of Delaware), Gary Livingston (University of Massachusetts), Michael Lyle, Douglas W. Lynn (Oregon Institute of Technology), Yashwant K Malaiya (Colorado State University), Stephen Mann (University of Waterloo), Bill Mark (University of Texas at Austin), Ananda Mondal (Claflin University), Euripedes Montagne (University of Central Florida), Tali Moreshet (Boston University), Alvin Moser (Seattle University), Walid Najjar (University of California, Riverside), Vijaykrishnan Narayanan (Penn State University), Danial J. Neebel (Loras College), Victor Nelson (Auburn University), John Nestor (Lafayette College), Jae C. Oh (Syracuse University), Joe Oldham (Centre College), Timour Paltashev, James Parkerson (University of Arkansas), Shaunak Pawagi (SUNY at Stony Brook), Steve Pearce, 

xx Preface Ted Pedersen (University of Minnesota), Lu Peng (Louisiana State University), Gregory D. Peterson (The University of Tennessee), William Pierce (Hood College), Milos Prvulovic (Georgia Tech), Partha Ranganathan (HP Labs), Dejan Raskovic (University of Alaska, Fairbanks) Brad Richards (University of Puget Sound), Roman Rozanov, Louis Rubinfield (Villanova University), Md Abdus Salam (Southern University), Augustine Samba (Kent State University), Robert Schaefer (Daniel Webster College), Carolyn J. C. Schauble (Colorado State University), Keith Schubert (CSU San Bernardino), William L. Schultz, Kelly Shaw (University of Richmond), Shahram Shirani (McMaster University), Scott Sigman (Drury University), Shai Simonson (Stonehill College), Bruce Smith, David Smith, Jeff W. Smith (University of Georgia, Athens), Mark Smotherman (Clemson University), Philip Snyder (Johns Hopkins University), Alex Sprintson (Texas A&M), Timothy D. Stanley (Brigham Young University), Dean Stevens (Morningside College), Nozar Tabrizi (Kettering University), Yuval Tamir (UCLA), Alexander Taubin (Boston University), Will Thacker (Winthrop University), Mithuna Thottethodi (Purdue University), Manghui Tu (Southern Utah University), Dean Tullsen (UC San Diego), Steve VanderLeest (Calvin College), Christopher Vickery (Queens College of CUNY), Rama Viswanathan (Beloit College), Ken Vollmar (Missouri State University), Guoping Wang (Indiana-Purdue University), Patricia Wenner (Bucknell University), Kent Wilken (University of California, Davis), David Wolfe (Gustavus Adolphus College), David Wood (University of Wisconsin, Madison), Ki Hwan Yum (University of Texas, San Antonio), Mohamed Zahran (City College of New York), Amr Zaky (Santa Clara University), Gerald D. Zarnett (Ryerson University), Nian Zhang (South Dakota School of Mines & Technology), Xiaoyu Zhang (California State University San Marcos), Jiling Zhong (Troy University), Huiyang Zhou (North Carolina State University), Weiyu Zhu (Illinois Wesleyan University). A special thanks also goes to Mark Smotherman for making multiple passes to find technical and writing glitches that significantly improved the quality of this edition. We wish to thank the extended Morgan Kaufmann family for agreeing to publish this book again under the able leadership of Katey Birtcher, Steve Merken, and Beth LoGiudice: I certainly couldn’t have completed the book without them. We also want to extend thanks to Janish Paul, who managed the book production process, and Patrick Ferguson, who did the cover design. Finally, I owe a huge debt to Yunsup Lee and Andrew Waterman for taking on the first edition’s conversion to RISC-V in their spare time while founding a startup company. Kudos to Eric Love as well, who made the original RISC-V versions of the exercises this book while finishing his Ph.D. We’re all excited to see what will happen with RISC-V in academia and beyond. The contributions of the nearly 150 people we mentioned here have helped make this new edition what I hope will be our best book yet. Enjoy! David A. Patterson

          THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Computer Abstractions and Technology 1.1 Introduction  3 1.2 Seven Great Ideas in Computer Architecture  10 1.3 Below Your Program  13 1.4 Under the Covers  16 1.5 Technologies for Building Processors and Memory  25 Civilization advances by extending the number of important operations which we can perform without thinking about them. Alfred North Whitehead, An Introduction to Mathematics, 1911 Computer Organization and Design RISC-V Edition. DOI: © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-820331-6.00001-6

1.6 Performance  29 1.7 The Power Wall  40 1.8 The Sea Change: The Switch from Uniprocessors to Multiprocessors  43 1.9 Real Stuff: Benchmarking the Intel Core i7  46 1.10 Going Faster: Matrix Multiply in Python  49 1.11 Fallacies and Pitfalls  50 1.12 Concluding Remarks  53 1.13 Historical Perspective and Further Reading  55 1.14 Self-Study  55 1.15 Exercises  59 1.1 Introduction Welcome to this book! We’re delighted to have this opportunity to convey the excitement of the world of computer systems. This is not a dry and dreary field, where progress is glacial and where new ideas atrophy from neglect. No! Computers are the product of the incredibly vibrant information technology industry, all aspects of which are responsible for almost 10% of the gross national product of the United States, and whose economy has become dependent in part on the rapid improvements in information technology. This unusual industry embraces innovation at a breathtaking rate. In the last 40 years, there have been a number of new computers whose introduction appeared to revolutionize the computing industry; these revolutions were cut short only because someone else built an even better computer. This race to innovate has led to unprecedented progress since the inception of electronic computing in the late 1940s. Had the transportation industry kept pace with the computer industry, for example, today we could travel from New York to London in a second for a penny. Take just a moment to contemplate how such an improvement would change society—living in Tahiti while working in San Francisco, going to Moscow for an evening at the Bolshoi Ballet—and you can appreciate the implications of such a change.

Chapter 1  Computer Abstractions and Technology Computers have led to a third revolution for civilization, with the information revolution taking its place alongside the agricultural and industrial revolutions. The resulting multiplication of humankind’s intellectual strength and reach naturally has affected our everyday lives profoundly and changed the ways in which the search for new knowledge is carried out. There is now a new vein of scientific investigation, with computational scientists joining theoretical and experimental scientists in the exploration of new frontiers in astronomy, biology, chemistry, and physics, among others. The computer revolution continues. Each time the cost of computing improves by another factor of 10, the opportunities for computers multiply. Applications that were economically infeasible suddenly become practical. In the recent past, the following applications were “computer science fiction.” ■ Computers in automobiles: Until microprocessors improved dramatically in price and performance in the early 1980s, computer control of cars was ludicrous. Today, computers reduce pollution, improve fuel efficiency via engine controls, and increase safety through nearly automated driving and air bag inflation to protect occupants in a crash. ■ Cell phones: Who would have dreamed that advances in computer systems would lead to more than half of the planet having mobile phones, allowing person-to-person communication to almost anyone anywhere in the world? ■ Human genome project: The cost of computer equipment to map and analyze human DNA sequences was hundreds of millions of dollars. It’s unlikely that anyone would have considered this project had the computer costs been 10 to 100 times higher, as they would have been 15 to 25 years earlier. Moreover, costs continue to drop; you will soon be able to acquire your own genome, allowing medical care to be tailored to you. ■ World Wide Web: Not in existence at the time of the first edition of this book, the web has transformed our society. For many, the web has replaced libraries and newspapers. ■ Search engines: As the content of the web grew in size and in value, finding relevant information became increasingly important. Today, many people rely on search engines for such a large part of their lives that it would be a hardship to go without them. Clearly, advances in this technology now affect almost every aspect of our society. Hardware advances have allowed programmers to create wonderfully useful software, which explains why computers are omnipresent. Today’s science fiction suggests tomorrow’s killer applications: already on their way are glasses that augment reality, the cashless society, and cars that can drive themselves.

 1.1  Introduction Traditional Classes of Computing Applications and Their Characteristics Although a common set of hardware technologies (see Sections 1.4 and 1.5) is used in computers ranging from smart home appliances to cell phones to the largest supercomputers, these different applications have distinct design requirements and employ the core hardware technologies in different ways. Broadly speaking, computers are used in three dissimilar classes of applications. Personal computers (PCs) in the form of laptops are possibly the best-known form of computing, which readers of this book have likely used extensively. Personal computers emphasize delivery of good performance to single users at low costs and usually execute third-party software. This class of computing drove the evolution of many computing technologies, which is merely 40 years old! Servers are the modern form of what were once much larger computers, and are usually accessed only via a network. Servers are oriented to carrying sizable workloads, which may consist of either single complex applications—usually a scientific or engineering application—or handling many small jobs, such as would occur in building a large web server. These applications are usually based on software from another source (such as a database or simulation system), but are often modified or customized for a particular function. Servers are built from the same basic technology as desktop computers, but provide for greater computing, storage, and input/output capacity. In general, servers also place a higher emphasis on dependability, since a crash is usually more costly than it would be on a single- user PC. Servers span the widest range in cost and capability. At the low end, a server may be little more than a desktop computer without a screen or keyboard and cost a thousand dollars. These low-end servers are typically used for file storage, small business applications, or simple web serving. At the other extreme are supercomputers, which at the present consist of hundreds of thousands of processors and many terabytes of memory, and cost tens to hundreds of millions of dollars. Supercomputers are usually used for high-end scientific and engineering calculations, such as weather forecasting, oil exploration, protein structure determination, and other large-scale problems. Although such supercomputers represent the peak of computing capability, they represent a relatively small fraction of the servers and thus a proportionally tiny fraction of the overall computer market in terms of total revenue. Embedded computers are the largest class of computers and span the widest range of applications and performance. Embedded computers include the microprocessors found in your car, the computers in a television set, and the networks of processors that control a modern airplane or cargo ship. A popular term today is Internet of Things (IoT) which suggests may small devices that all communicate wirelessly over the Internet. Embedded computing systems are designed to run one application or one set of related applications that are normally integrated with the hardware and delivered as a single system; thus, despite the large number of embedded computers, most users never really see that they are using a computer! personal computer (PC)  A computer designed for use by an individual, usually incorporating a graphics display, a keyboard, and a mouse. server  A computer used for running larger programs for multiple users, often simultaneously, and typically accessed only via a network. supercomputer  A class of computers with the highest performance and cost; they are configured as servers and typically cost tens to hundreds of millions of dollars. terabyte (TB)  Originally 1,099,511,627,776 (240) bytes, although communications and secondary storage systems developers started using the term to mean 1,000,000,000,000 (1012) bytes. To reduce confusion, we now use the term tebibyte (TiB) for 240 bytes, defining terabyte (TB) to mean 1012 bytes. Figure 1.1 shows the full range of decimal and binary values and names. embedded computer  A computer inside another device used for running one predetermined application or collection of software.

Chapter 1  Computer Abstractions and Technology Embedded applications often have unique application requirements that combine a minimum performance with stringent limitations on cost or power. For example, consider a music player: the processor need only to be as fast as necessary to handle its limited function, and beyond that, minimizing cost and power is the most important objective. Despite their low cost, embedded computers often have lower tolerance for failure, since the results can vary from upsetting (when your new television crashes) to devastating (such as might occur when the computer in a plane or cargo ship crashes). In consumer-oriented embedded applications, such as a digital home appliance, dependability is achieved primarily through simplicity— the emphasis is on doing one function as perfectly as possible. In large embedded systems, techniques of redundancy from the server world are often employed. Although this book focuses on general-purpose computers, most concepts apply directly, or with slight modifications, to embedded computers. Elaboration:  Elaborations are short sections used throughout the text to provide more detail on a particular subject that may be of interest. Disinterested readers may skip over an Elaboration, since the subsequent material will never depend on the contents of the Elaboration. Many embedded processors are designed using processor cores, a version of a processor written in a hardware description language, such as Verilog or VHDL (see Chapter 4). The core allows a designer to integrate other application-specific hardware with the processor core for fabrication on a single chip. Welcome to the Post-PC Era The continuing march of technology brings about generational changes in computer hardware that shake up the entire information technology industry. Since the fourth edition of the book, we have undergone such a change, as significant in the kilobyte KB kibibyte KiB 2% megabyte MB mebibyte MiB 5% gigabyte GB gibibyte GiB 7% terabyte TB tebibyte TiB 10% petabyte PB pebibyte PiB 13% exabyte EB exbibyte EiB 15% zettabyte ZB zebibyte ZiB 18% yottabyte YB yobibyte YiB 21% ronnabyte RB 10 27 24% queccabyte QB 10 30 robibyte RiB quebibyte QiB 2 100 27% FIGURE 1.1  The 2X vs. 10Y bytes ambiguity was resolved by adding a binary notation for all the common size terms. In the last column we note how much larger the binary term is than its corresponding decimal term, which is compounded as we head down the chart. These prefixes work for bits as well as bytes, so gigabit (Gb) is 109 bits while gibibits (Gib) is 230 bits. The society that runs the metric system created the decimal prefixes, with the last two proposed only in 2019 in anticipation of the global capacity of storage systems. All the names are derived from the entymology in Latin of the powers of 1000 that they represent.

 1.1  Introduction past as the switch starting 40 years ago to personal computers. Replacing the PC is the personal mobile device (PMD). PMDs are battery operated with wireless connectivity to the Internet and typically cost hundreds of dollars, and, like PCs, users can download software (“apps”) to run on them. Unlike PCs, they no longer have a keyboard and mouse, and are more likely to rely on a touch-sensitive screen or even speech input. Today’s PMD is a smart phone or a tablet computer, but tomorrow it may include electronic glasses. Figure 1.2 shows the rapid growth over time of tablets and smart phones versus that of PCs and traditional cell phones. Taking over from the conventional server is Cloud Computing, which relies upon giant datacenters that are now known as Warehouse Scale Computers (WSCs). Companies like Amazon and Google build these WSCs containing 50,000 servers and then let companies rent portions of them so that they can provide software services to PMDs without having to build WSCs of their own. Indeed, Software as a Service (SaaS) deployed via the Cloud is revolutionizing the software industry just as PMDs and WSCs are revolutionizing the hardware industry. Today’s software developers will often have a portion of their application that runs on the PMD and a portion that runs in the Cloud. What You Can Learn in This Book Successful programmers have always been concerned about the performance of their programs, because getting results to the user quickly is critical in creating popular software. In the 1960s and 1970s, a primary constraint on computer performance was the size of the computer’s memory. Thus, programmers often followed a simple credo: minimize memory space to make programs fast. In the Personal mobile devices (PMDs)  are small wireless devices to connect to the Internet; they rely on batteries for power, and software is installed by downloading apps. Conventional examples are smart phones and tablets. Cloud Computing  refers to large collections of servers that provide services over the Internet; some providers rent dynamically varying numbers of servers as a utility. Software as a Service (SaaS)  delivers software and data as a service over the Internet, usually via a thin program such as a browser that runs on local client devices, instead of binary code that must be installed, and runs wholly on that device. Examples include web search and social networking. Millions Cell phone (excluding smart phones) PC (excluding tablets) Smart phone Tablet FIGURE 1.2  The number manufactured per year of tablets and smart phones, which reflect the post-PC era, versus personal computers and traditional cell phones. Smart phones represent the recent growth in the cell phone industry, and they passed PCs in 2011. PCs, tablets, and traditional cell phone categories are declining. The peak volume years are 2011 for cell phones, 2013 for PCs, and 2014 for tablets. PCs fell from 20% of total units shipped in 2007 to 10% in 2018.

Chapter 1  Computer Abstractions and Technology last two decades, advances in computer design and memory technology have greatly reduced the importance of small memory size in most applications other than those in embedded computing systems. Programmers interested in performance now need to understand the issues that have replaced the simple memory model of the 1960s: the parallel nature of processors and the hierarchical nature of memories. We demonstrate the importance of this understanding in Chapters 3 to 6 by showing how to improve performance of a C program by a factor of 200. Moreover, as we explain in Section 1.7, today’s programmers need to worry about energy efficiency of their programs running either on the PMD or in the Cloud, which also requires understanding what is below your code. Programmers who seek to build competitive versions of software will therefore need to increase their knowledge of computer organization. We are honored to have the opportunity to explain what’s inside this revolutionary machine, unraveling the software below your program and the hardware under the covers of your computer. By the time you complete this book, we believe you will be able to answer the following questions: ■ How are programs written in a high-level language, such as C or Java, translated into the language of the hardware, and how does the hardware execute the resulting program? Comprehending these concepts forms the basis of understanding the aspects of both the hardware and software that affect program performance. ■ What is the interface between the software and the hardware, and how does software instruct the hardware to perform needed functions? These concepts are vital to understanding how to write many kinds of software. ■ What determines the performance of a program, and how can a programmer improve the performance? As we will see, this depends on the original program, the software translation of that program into the computer’s language, and the effectiveness of the hardware in executing the program. ■ What techniques can be used by hardware designers to improve performance? This book will introduce the basic concepts of modern computer design. The interested reader will find much more material on this topic in our advanced book, Computer Architecture: A Quantitative Approach. ■ What techniques can be used by hardware designers to improve energy efficiency? What can the programmer do to help or hinder energy efficiency? ■ What are the reasons for and the consequences of the switch from sequential processing to parallel processing? This book gives the motivation, describes the current hardware mechanisms to support parallelism, and surveys the new generation of “multicore” microprocessors (see Chapter 6). ■ Since the first commercial computer in 1951, what great ideas did computer architects come up with that lay the foundation of modern computing? multicore microprocessor  A microprocessor containing multiple processors (“cores”) in a single integrated circuit.

 1.1  Introduction Without understanding the answers to these questions, improving the performance of your program on a modern computer or evaluating what features might make one computer better than another for a particular application will be a complex process of trial and error, rather than a scientific procedure driven by insight and analysis. This first chapter lays the foundation for the rest of the book. It introduces the basic ideas and definitions, places the major components of software and hardware in perspective, shows how to evaluate performance and energy, introduces integrated circuits (the technology that fuels the computer revolution), and explains the shift to multicores. In this chapter and later ones, you will likely see many new words, or words that you may have heard but are not sure what they mean. Don’t panic! Yes, there is a lot of special terminology used in describing modern computers, but the terminology actually helps, since it enables us to describe precisely a function or capability. In addition, computer designers (including your authors) love using acronyms, which are easy to understand once you know what the letters stand for! To help you remember and locate terms, we have included a highlighted definition of every term in the margins the first time it appears in the text. After a short time of working with the terminology, you will be fluent, and your friends will be impressed as you correctly use acronyms such as BIOS, CPU, DIMM, DRAM, PCIe, SATA, and many others. To reinforce how the software and hardware systems used to run a program will affect performance, we use a special section, Understanding Program Performance, throughout the book to summarize important insights into program performance. The first one appears below. acronym  A word constructed by taking the initial letters of a string of words. For example: RAM is an acronym for Random Access Memory, and CPU is an acronym for Central Processing Unit. The performance of a program depends on a combination of the effectiveness of the algorithms used in the program, the software systems used to create and translate the program into machine instructions, and the effectiveness of the computer in executing those instructions, which may include input/output (I/O) operations. This table summarizes how the hardware and software affect performance. Understanding Program Performance Hardware or software component How this component affects performance Where is this topic covered? Algorithm Determines both the number of source-level statements and the number of I/O operations executed Other books! Programming language, compiler, and architecture Determines the number of computer instructions for each source-level statement Chapters 2 and 3 Processor and memory system Determines how fast instructions can be executed Chapters 4, 5, and 6 I/O system (hardware and operating system) Determines how fast I/O operations may be executed Chapters 4, 5, and 6

Chapter 1  Computer Abstractions and Technology 1.2 Seven Great Ideas in Computer Architecture We now introduce seven great ideas that computer architects have invented in the last 60 years of computer design. These ideas are so powerful they have lasted long after the first computer that used them, with newer architects demonstrating their admiration by imitating their predecessors. These great ideas are themes that we will weave through this and subsequent chapters as examples arise. To point out their influence, in this section we introduce icons and highlighted terms that represent the great ideas and we use them to identify the nearly 100 sections of the book that feature use of the great ideas. Check Yourself Check Yourself sections are designed to help readers assess whether they comprehend the major concepts introduced in a chapter and understand the implications of those concepts. Some Check Yourself questions have simple answers; others are for discussion among a group. Answers to the specific questions can be found at the end of the chapter. Check Yourself questions appear only at the end of a section, making it easy to skip them if you are sure you understand the material. 1. The number of embedded processors sold every year greatly outnumbers the number of PC and even post-PC processors. Can you confirm or deny this insight based on your own experience? Try to count the number of embedded processors in your home. How does it compare with the number of conventional computers in your home? 2. As mentioned earlier, both the software and hardware affect the performance of a program. Can you think of examples where each of the following is the right place to look for a performance bottleneck? ■ The algorithm chosen ■ The programming language or compiler ■ The operating system ■ The processor ■ The I/O system and devices

 1.2  Seven Great Ideas in Computer Architecture Use Abstraction to Simplify Design Both computer architects and programmers had to invent techniques to make themselves more productive, for otherwise design time would lengthen as dramatically as resources grew. A major productivity technique for hardware and software is to use abstractions to characterize the design at different levels of representation; lower-level details are hidden to offer a simpler model at higher levels. We’ll use the abstract painting icon to represent this second great idea. Make the Common Case Fast Making the common case fast will tend to enhance performance better than optimizing the rare case. Ironically, the common case is often simpler than the rare case and hence is usually easier to enhance. This common sense advice implies that you know what the common case is, which is only possible with careful experimentation and measurement (see Section 1.6). We use a sports car as the icon for making the common case fast, as the most common trip has one or two passengers, and it’s surely easier to make a fast sports car than a fast minivan! Performance via Parallelism Since the dawn of computing, computer architects have offered designs that get more performance by computing operations in parallel. We’ll see many examples of parallelism in this book. We use multiple jet engines of a plane as our icon for parallel performance. Performance via Pipelining A particular pattern of parallelism is so prevalent in computer architecture that it merits its own name: pipelining. For example, before fire engines, a “bucket brigade” would respond to a fire, which many cowboy movies show in response to a dastardly act by the villain. The townsfolk form a human chain to carry a water source to fire, as they could much more quickly move buckets up the chain instead of individuals running back and forth. Our pipeline icon is a sequence of pipes, with each section representing one stage of the pipeline. Performance via Prediction Following the saying that it can be better to ask for forgiveness than to ask for permission, the next great idea is prediction. In some cases, it can be faster on average to guess and start working rather than wait until you know for sure, assuming that the mechanism to recover from a misprediction is not too expensive and your prediction is relatively accurate. We use the fortune-teller’s crystal ball as our prediction icon.

Chapter 1  Computer Abstractions and Technology Hierarchy of Memories Programmers want the memory to be fast, large, and cheap, as memory speed often shapes performance, capacity limits the size of problems that can be solved, and the cost of memory today is often the majority of computer cost. Architects have found that they can address these conflicting demands with a hierarchy of memories, with the fastest, smallest, and the most expensive memory per bit at the top of the hierarchy and the slowest, largest, and cheapest per bit at the bottom. As we shall see in Chapter 5, caches give the programmer the illusion that main memory is almost as fast as the top of the hierarchy and nearly as big and cheap as the bottom of the hierarchy. We use a layered triangle icon to represent the memory hierarchy. The shape indicates speed, cost, and size: the closer to the top, the faster and more expensive per bit the memory; the wider the base of the layer, the bigger the memory. Dependability via Redundancy Computers not only need to be fast; they need to be dependable. Since any physical device can fail, we make systems dependable by including redundant components that can take over when a failure occurs and to help detect failures. We use the tractor-trailer as our icon, since the dual tires on each side of its rear axles allow the truck to continue driving even when one tire fails. (Presumably, the truck driver heads immediately to a repair facility so the flat tire can be fixed, thereby restoring redundancy!) In the prior edition, we listed an eighth great idea, which was “Designing for Moore’s Law.” Gordon Moore, one of the founders of Intel, made a remarkable prediction in 1965: integrated circuit resources would double every year. A decade later he amended his prediction to doubling every two years. His prediction was accurate, and for 50 years Moore’s law shaped computer architecture. As computer designs can take years, the resources available per chip (“transistors”; see page 25) could easily double or triple between the start and finish of the project. Like a skeet shooter, computer architects had to anticipate where the technology would be when the design was finished rather than design for when it began. Alas, no exponential growth can last forever, and Moore’s law is no longer accurate. The slowing of Moore’s law is shocking for computer designers who have long leveraged it. Some do not want to believe it is over despite substantial evidence to the contrary. Part of the reason is confusion between saying that Moore’s prediction of a biannual doubling rate is now incorrect and claiming that semiconductors will no longer improve. Semiconductor technology will continue to improve but more slowly than in the past. Starting with this edition, we will discuss the implications of the slowing of Moore’s law, especially in Chapter 6. Elaboration:  During the heyday of Moore’s law, the cost per chip resource dropped with each new technology generation. For the latest technologies, the cost per resource may be flat or even rising with each new generation due to the cost of new equipment, elaborate processes invented to make chips work at finer feature sizes, and reduced number of companies investing in these new technologies to push the state of the art. Less competition naturally leads to higher prices.

 1.3  Below Your Program 1.3 Below Your Program A typical application, such as a word processor or a large database system, may consist of millions of lines of code and rely on sophisticated software libraries that implement complex functions in support of the application. As we will see, the hardware in a computer can only execute extremely simple low-level instructions. To go from a complex application to the primitive instructions involves several layers of software that interpret or translate high-level operations into simple computer instructions, an example of the great idea of abstraction. Figure 1.3 shows that these layers of software are organized primarily in a hierarchical fashion, with applications being the outermost ring and a variety of systems software sitting between the hardware and the application software. There are many types of systems software, but two types of systems software are central to every computer system today: an operating system and a compiler. An operating system interfaces between a user’s program and the hardware and provides a variety of services and supervisory functions. Among the most important functions are: ■ Handling basic input and output operations ■ Allocating storage and memory ■ Providing for protected sharing of the computer among multiple applications using it simultaneously Examples of operating systems in use today are Linux, iOS, Android, and Windows. systems software  Software that provides services that are commonly useful, including operating systems, compilers, loaders, and assemblers. operating system  Supervising program that manages the resources of a computer for the benefit of the programs that run on that computer. $ S S OL F D WL R Q  V R IW Z D U H  \ V W H P V  V R I W Z D U H  +DUGZDUH FIGURE 1.3  A simplified view of hardware and software as hierarchical layers, shown as concentric circles with hardware in the center and application software outermost. In complex applications, there are often multiple layers of application software as well. For example, a database system may run on top of the systems software hosting an application, which in turn runs on top of the database. In Paris they simply stared when I spoke to them in French; I never did succeed in making those idiots understand their own language. Mark Twain, The Innocents Abroad, 1869

Chapter 1  Computer Abstractions and Technology Compilers perform another vital function: the translation of a program written in a high-level language, such as C, C++, Java, or Visual Basic into instructions that the hardware can execute. Given the sophistication of modern programming languages and the simplicity of the instructions executed by the hardware, the translation from a high-level language program to hardware instructions is complex. We give a brief overview of the process here and then go into more depth in Chapter 2. From a High-Level Language to the Language of Hardware To speak directly to electronic hardware, you need to send electrical signals. The easiest signals for computers to understand are on and off, and so the computer alphabet is just two letters. Just as the 26 letters of the English alphabet do not limit how much can be written, the two letters of the computer alphabet do not limit what computers can do. The two symbols for these two letters are the numbers 0 and 1, and we commonly think of the computer language as numbers in base 2, or binary numbers. We refer to each “letter” as a binary digit or bit. Computers are slaves to our commands, which are called instructions. Instructions, which are just collections of bits that the computer understands and obeys, can be thought of as numbers. For example, the bits tell one computer to add two numbers. Chapter 2 explains why we use numbers for instructions and data; we don’t want to steal that chapter’s thunder, but using numbers for both instructions and data is a foundation of computing. The first programmers communicated to computers in binary numbers, but this was so tedious that they quickly invented new notations that were closer to the way humans think. At first, these notations were translated to binary by hand, but this process was still tiresome. Using the computer to help program the computer, the pioneers invented software to translate from symbolic notation to binary. The first of these programs was named an assembler. This program translates a symbolic version of an instruction into the binary version. For example, the programmer would write add A, B and the assembler would translate this notation into This instruction tells the computer to add the two numbers A and B. The name coined for this symbolic language, still used today, is assembly language. In contrast, the binary language that the machine understands is the machine language. Although a tremendous improvement, assembly language is still far from the notations a scientist might like to use to simulate fluid flow or that an accountant might use to balance the books. Assembly language requires the programmer to write one line for every instruction that the computer will follow, forcing the programmer to think like the computer. compiler  A program that translates high-level language statements into assembly language statements. binary digit  Also called a bit. One of the two numbers in base 2 (0 or 1) that are the components of information. instruction  A command that computer hardware understands and obeys. assembler  A program that translates a symbolic version of instructions into the binary version. assembly language  A symbolic representation of machine instructions. machine language  A binary representation of machine instructions.

 1.3  Below Your Program The recognition that a program could be written to translate a more powerful language into computer instructions was one of the great breakthroughs in the early days of computing. Programmers today owe their productivity—and their sanity—to the creation of high-level programming languages and compilers that translate programs in such languages into instructions. Figure 1.4 shows the relationships among these programs and languages, which are more examples of the power of abstraction. high-level programming language  A portable language such as C, C++, Java, or Visual Basic that is composed of words and algebraic notation that can be translated by a compiler into assembly language. swap(size_t v[], size_t k) { size_t temp; temp = v[k]; v[k] = v[k+1]; v[k+1] = temp; } Assembler Compiler Binary machine language program (for RISC-V) Assembly language program (for RISC-V) High-level language program (in C) slli x6, x11, 3 add x6, x10, x6 lw x5, 0(x6) lw x7, 4(x6) sw x7, 0(x6) sw x5, 4(x6) jalr x0, 0(x1) swap: FIGURE 1.4  C program compiled into assembly language and then assembled into binary machine language. Although the translation from high-level language to binary machine language is shown in two steps, some compilers cut out the middleman and produce binary machine language directly. These languages and this program are examined in more detail in Chapter 2.

Chapter 1  Computer Abstractions and Technology A compiler enables a programmer to write this high-level language expression: A + B The compiler would compile it into this assembly language statement: add A, B As shown above, the assembler would translate this statement into the binary instructions that tell the computer to add the two numbers A and B. High-level programming languages offer several important benefits. First, they allow the programmer to think in a more natural language, using English words and algebraic notation, resulting in programs that look much more like text than like tables of cryptic symbols (see Figure 1.4). Moreover, they allow languages to be designed according to their intended use. Hence, Fortran was designed for scientific computation, Cobol for business data processing, Lisp for symbol manipulation, and so on. There are also domain-specific languages for even narrower groups of users, such as those interested in machine learning, for example. The second advantage of programming languages is improved programmer productivity. One of the few areas of widespread agreement in software development is that it takes less time to develop programs when they are written in languages that require fewer lines to express an idea. Conciseness is a clear advantage of high- level languages over assembly language. The final advantage is that programming languages allow programs to be independent of the computer on which they were developed, since compilers and assemblers can translate high-level language programs to the binary instructions of any computer. These three advantages are so strong that today little programming is done in assembly language. 1.4 Under the Covers Now that we have looked below your program to uncover the underlying software, let’s open the covers of your computer to learn about the underlying hardware. The underlying hardware in any computer performs the same basic functions: inputting data, outputting data, processing data, and storing data. How these functions are performed is the primary topic of this book, and subsequent chapters deal with different parts of these four tasks. When we come to an important point in this book, a point so significant that we hope you will remember it forever, we emphasize it by identifying it as a Big Picture item. We have about a dozen Big Pictures in this book, the first being the five components of a computer that perform the tasks of inputting, outputting, processing, and storing data. Two key components of computers are input devices, such as the microphone, and output devices, such as the speaker. As the names suggest, input feeds the input device  A mechanism through which the computer is fed information, such as a keyboard. output device  A mechanism that conveys the result of a computation to a user, such as a display, or to another computer.

 1.4  Under the Covers computer, and output is the result of computation sent to the user. Some devices, such as wireless networks, provide both input and output to the computer. Chapters 5 and 6 describe input/output (I/O) devices in more detail, but let’s take an introductory tour through the computer hardware, starting with the external I/O devices. The five classic components of a computer are input, output, memory, datapath, and control, with the last two sometimes combined and called the processor. Figure 1.5 shows the standard organization of a computer. This organization is independent of hardware technology: you can place every piece of every computer, past and present, into one of these five categories. To help you keep all this in perspective, the five components of a computer are shown on the front page of each of the following chapters, with the portion of interest to that chapter highlighted. The BIG Picture FIGURE 1.5  The organization of a computer, showing the five classic components. The processor gets instructions and data from memory. Input writes data to memory, and output reads data from memory. Control sends the signals that determine the operations of the datapath, memory, input, and output.

Chapter 1  Computer Abstractions and Technology Through the Looking Glass The most fascinating I/O device is probably the graphics display. Most personal mobile devices use liquid crystal displays (LCDs) to get a thin, low-power display. The LCD is not the source of light; instead, it controls the transmission of light. A typical LCD includes rod-shaped molecules in a liquid that form a twisting helix that bends light entering the display, from either a light source behind the display or less often from reflected light. The rods straighten out when a current is applied and no longer bend the light. Since the liquid crystal material is between two screens polarized at 90 degrees, the light cannot pass through unless it is bent. Today, most LCDs use an active matrix that has a tiny transistor switch at each pixel to control current precisely and make sharper images. A red-green-blue mask associated with each dot on the display determines the intensity of the three- color components in the final image; in a color active matrix LCD, there are three transistor switches at each point. The image is composed of a matrix of picture elements, or pixels, which can be represented as a matrix of bits, called a bit map. Depending on the size of the screen and the resolution, the display matrix in a typical tablet ranges in size from 1024 × 768 to 2048 × 1536. A color display might use 8 bits for each of the three colors (red, blue, and green), for 24 bits per pixel, permitting millions of different colors to be displayed. The computer hardware support for graphics consists mainly of a raster refresh buffer, or frame buffer, to store the bit map. The image to be represented onscreen is stored in the frame buffer, and the bit pattern per pixel is read out to the graphics display at the refresh rate. Figure 1.6 shows a frame buffer with a simplified design of just 4 bits per pixel. The goal of the bit map is to represent faithfully what is on the screen. The challenges in graphics systems arise because the human eye is very good at detecting even subtle changes on the screen. liquid crystal display (LCD)  A display technology using a thin layer of liquid polymers that can be used to transmit or block light according to whether a charge is applied. active matrix display  A liquid crystal display using a transistor to control the transmission of light at each individual pixel. pixel  The smallest individual picture element. Screens are composed of hundreds of thousands to millions of pixels, organized in a matrix. Through computer displays I have landed an airplane on the deck of a moving carrier, observed a nuclear particle hit a potential well, flown in a rocket at nearly the speed of light and watched a computer reveal its innermost workings. Ivan Sutherland, the “father” of computer graphics, Scientific American, 1984 X0 X1 Y0 Frame buffer Raster scan CRT display 0 011 1 101 Y1 X0 X1 Y0 Y1 FIGURE 1.6  Each coordinate in the frame buffer on the left determines the shade of the corresponding coordinate for the raster scan CRT display on the right. Pixel (X0, Y0) contains the bit pattern 0011, which is a lighter shade on the screen than the bit pattern 1101 in pixel (X1, Y1).

 1.4  Under the Covers Touchscreen While PCs also use LCDs, the tablets and smartphones of the post-PC era have replaced the keyboard and mouse with touch-sensitive displays, which has the wonderful user interface advantage of users pointing directly at what they are interested in rather than indirectly with a mouse. While there are a variety of ways to implement a touch screen, many tablets today use capacitive sensing. Since people are electrical conductors, if an insulator like glass is covered with a transparent conductor, touching distorts the electrostatic field of the screen, which results in a change in capacitance. This technology can allow multiple touches simultaneously, which recognizes gestures that can lead to attractive user interfaces. Opening the Box Figure 1.7 shows the contents of the Apple iPhone XS Max smart phone. Unsurprisingly, of the five classic components of the computer, I/O dominates this device. The list of I/O devices includes a capacitive multitouch LCD display, front-facing camera, rear-facing camera, microphone, headphone jack, speakers, accelerometer, integrated circuit  Also called a chip. A device combining dozens to millions of transistors. FIGURE 1.7  Components of the Apple iPhone XS Max cell phone. At the left is the capacitive multitouch screen and LCD display. Next to it is the battery. To the far right is the metal frame that attaches the LCD to the back of the iPhone. The small components in the center are what we think of as the computer; they are not simple rectangles to fit compactly inside the case next to the battery. Figure 1.8 shows a close-up of the board to the left of the metal case, which is the logic printed circuit board that contains the processor and memory. (Courtesy TechIngishts, www.techIngishts.com)

Chapter 1  Computer Abstractions and Technology FIGURE 1.8  The logic board of Apple iPhone XS Max in Figure 1.7. The large integrated circuit in the middle is the Apple A12 chip, which contains two large and four small ARM processor cores that run at 2.5 GHz, as well as 2 GiB of main memory inside the package. Figure 1.9 shows a photograph of the processor chip inside the A12 package. A similar-sized chip on a symmetric board that attaches to the back is a 64 GiB flash memory chip for nonvolatile storage. The other chips on the board include the power management integrated controller and audio amplifier chips. (Courtesy TechIngishts, www.techIngishts.com) Apple A12 APL1W81 + Micron MT53D512M64D4SB-046 XT:E 4GB Mobile LPDDR4x SDRAM Apple 338S00375 PMIC Apple 338S00456 PMIC Texas Instruments SN2600B1 Battery Charger STMicroelectonics STB601A0 PMIC Apple 338S00411 Audio Amplifier gyroscope, Wi-Fi network, and Bluetooth network. The datapath, control, and memory are a tiny portion of the components. The small rectangles in Figure 1.8 contain the devices that drive our advancing technology, called integrated circuits and nicknamed chips. The A12 package seen in the middle of in Figure 1.8 contains two large and four little ARM processors that operate with a clock rate of 2.5 GHz. The processor is the active part of the computer, following the instructions of a program to the letter. It adds numbers, tests numbers, signals I/O devices to activate, and so on. Occasionally, people call the processor the CPU, for the more bureaucratic-sounding central processor unit. Descending even lower into the hardware, Figure 1.9 reveals details of a microprocessor. The processor logically comprises two main components: datapath and control, the respective brawn and brain of the processor. The datapath performs the arithmetic operations, and control tells the datapath, central processor unit (CPU)  Also called processor. The active part of the computer, which contains the datapath and control and which adds numbers, tests numbers, signals I/O devices to activate, and so on. datapath  The component of the processor that performs arithmetic operations.

 1.4  Under the Covers memory, and I/O devices what to do according to the wishes of the instructions of the program. Chapter 4 explains the datapath and control for a higher- performance design. The iPhone XS Max package in Figure 1.8 also includes a memory chip with 32 gibibits or 2 GiB of capacity. The memory is where the programs are kept when they are running; it also contains the data needed by running programs. The memory is a DRAM chip. DRAM stands for dynamic random-access memory. DRAMs are used together to contain the instructions and data of a program. In contrast to sequential-access memory, such as magnetic tapes, the RAM portion of the term DRAM means that memory accesses take basically the same amount of time no matter what portion of memory is read. Descending into the depths of any component of the hardware reveals insights into the computer. Inside the processor is another type of memory— cache memory. Cache memory consists of small, fast memory that acts as a DRAM buffer. (The nontechnical definition of cache is a safe place for hiding things.) Cache is built using a different memory technology, static random- access memory (SRAM). SRAM is faster but less dense, and hence more expensive, than DRAM (see Chapter 5). SRAM and DRAM are two layers of the memory hierarchy. As mentioned above, one of the great ideas to improve design is abstraction. One of the most important abstractions is the interface between the hardware and the lowest-level software. Software communicates to hardware via a vocabulary. The words of the vocabulary are called instructions, and the vocabulary iteself is called the instruction set architecture, or simply architecture, of a computer. The instruction set architecture includes anything programmers need to know to make a binary machine language program work correctly, including instructions, I/O devices, and so on. Typically, the operating system will encapsulate the details of doing I/O, allocating memory, and other low-level system functions so that application programmers do not need to worry about such details. The combination of the basic instruction set and the operating system interface provided for application programmers is called the application binary interface (ABI). An instruction set architecture allows computer designers to talk about functions independently from the hardware that performs them. For example, we can talk about the functions of a digital clock (keeping time, displaying the time, setting the alarm) separately from the clock hardware (quartz crystal, LED displays, plastic buttons). Computer designers distinguish architecture from an implementation of an architecture along the same lines: an implementation is hardware that obeys the architecture abstraction. These ideas bring us to another Big Picture. control  The component of the processor that commands the datapath, memory, and I/O devices according to the instructions of the program. memory  The storage area in which programs are kept when they are running and that contains the data needed by the running programs. cache memory  A small, fast memory that acts as a buffer for a slower, larger memory. static random access memory (SRAM)  Also memory built as an integrated circuit, but faster and less dense than DRAM. dynamic random access memory (DRAM)  Memory built as an integrated circuit; it provides random access to any location. Access times are 50 nanoseconds and cost per gigabyte in 2012 was $5 to $10.

Chapter 1  Computer Abstractions and Technology Both hardware and software consist of hierarchical layers using abstraction, with each lower layer hiding details from the level above. One key interface between the levels of abstraction is the instruction set architecture—the interface between the hardware and low-level software. This abstract interface enables many implementations of varying cost and performance to run identical software. The BIG Picture FIGURE 1.9  The processor integrated circuit inside the A12 package. The size of chip is 8.4 by 9.91 mm, and it was manufactured originally in a 7-nm process (see Section 1.5). It has two identical ARM processors or cores in the lower middle of the chip, four small cores on the lower right of the chip, a graphics processing unit (GPU) on the far right (see Section 6.6), and a domain-specific accelerator for neural networks (see Section 6.7) called the NPU on the far left. In the middle are second-level cache memory (L2) banks for the big and small cores (see Chapter 5). At the top and bottom of the chip are interfaces to the main memory (DDR DRAM). (Courtesy TechInsights, www.techinsights.com) instruction set architecture  Also called architecture. An abstract interface between the hardware and the lowest-level software that encompasses all the information necessary to write a machine language program that will run correctly, including instructions, registers, memory access, I/O, and so on. application binary interface (ABI)  The user portion of the instruction set plus the operating system interfaces used by application programmers. It defines a standard for binary portability across computers. implementation  Hardware that obeys the architecture abstraction.

 1.4  Under the Covers A Safe Place for Data Thus far, we have seen how to input data, compute using the data, and display data. If we were to lose power to the computer, however, everything would be lost because the memory inside the computer is volatile—that is, when it loses power, it forgets. In contrast, a DVD disk doesn’t forget the movie when you turn off the power to the DVD player, and is therefore a nonvolatile memory technology. To distinguish between the volatile memory used to hold data and programs while they are running and this nonvolatile memory used to store data and programs between runs, the term main memory or primary memory is used for the former, and secondary memory for the latter. Secondary memory forms the next lower layer of the memory hierarchy. DRAMs have dominated main memory since 1975, but magnetic disks dominated secondary memory starting even earlier. Because of their size and form factor, personal mobile devices use flash memory, a nonvolatile semiconductor memory, instead of disks. Figure 1.8 shows the chip containing the 64 GiB flash memory of the iPhone Xs. While slower than DRAM, it is much cheaper than DRAM in addition to being nonvolatile. Although costing more per bit than disks, it is smaller, it comes in much smaller capacities, it is more rugged, and it is more power efficient than disks. Hence, flash memory is the standard secondary memory for PMDs. Alas, unlike disks and DRAM, flash memory bits wear out after 100,000 to 1,000,000 writes. Thus, file systems must keep track of the number of writes and have a strategy to avoid wearing out storage, such as by moving popular data. Chapter 5 describes disks and flash memory in more detail. Communicating with Other Computers We’ve explained how we can input, compute, display, and save data, but there is still one missing item found in today’s computers: computer networks. Just as the processor shown in Figure 1.5 is connected to memory and I/O devices, networks interconnect whole computers, allowing computer users to extend the power of computing by including communication. Networks have become so popular that they are the backbone of current computer systems; a new personal mobile device or server without a network interface would be ridiculed. Networked computers have several major advantages: ■ Communication: Information is exchanged between computers at high speeds. ■ Resource sharing: Rather than each computer having its own I/O devices, computers on the network can share I/O devices. ■ Nonlocal access: By connecting computers over long distances, users need not be near the computer they are using. volatile memory  Storage, such as DRAM, that retains data only if it is receiving power. nonvolatile memory  A form of memory that retains data even in the absence of a power source and that is used to store programs between runs. A DVD disk is nonvolatile. main memory  Also called primary memory. Memory used to hold programs while they are running; typically consists of DRAM in today’s computers. secondary memory  Nonvolatile memory used to store programs and data between runs; typically consists of flash memory in PMDs and magnetic disks in servers. magnetic disk  Also called hard disk. A form of nonvolatile secondary memory composed of rotating platters coated with a magnetic recording material. Because they are rotating mechanical devices, access times are about 5 to 20 milliseconds and cost per gigabyte in 2020 was $0.01 to $0.02.

Chapter 1  Computer Abstractions and Technology Networks vary in length and performance, with the cost of communication increasing according to both the speed of communication and the distance that information travels. Perhaps the most popular type of network is Ethernet. It can be up to a kilometer long and transfer at up to 100 gigabits per second. Its length and speed make Ethernet useful to connect computers on the same floor of a building; hence, it is an example of what is generically called a local area network. Local area networks are interconnected with switches that can also provide routing services and security. Wide area networks cross continents and are the backbone of the Internet, which supports the web. They are typically based on optical fibers and are leased from telecommunication companies. Networks have changed the face of computing in the last 40 years, both by becoming much more ubiquitous and by making dramatic increases in performance. In the 1970s, very few individuals had access to electronic mail, the Internet and web did not exist, and physically mailing magnetic tapes was the primary way to transfer large amounts of data between two locations. Local area networks were almost nonexistent, and the few existing wide area networks had limited capacity and restricted access. As networking technology improved, it became considerably cheaper and had a significantly higher capacity. For example, the first standardized local area network technology, developed about 40 years ago, was a version of Ethernet that had a maximum capacity (also called bandwidth) of 10 million bits per second, typically shared by tens of, if not a hundred, computers. Today, local area network technology offers a capacity of from 1 to 100 gigabits per second, usually shared by at most a few computers. Optical communications technology has allowed similar growth in the capacity of wide area networks, from hundreds of kilobits to gigabits and from hundreds of computers connected to a worldwide network to millions of computers connected. This dramatic rise in deployment of networking combined with increases in capacity have made network technology central to the information revolution of the last 30 years. For the last 15 decades, another innovation in networking is reshaping the way computers communicate. Wireless technology is widespread, which enabled the post-PC era. The ability to make a radio in the same low-cost semiconductor technology (CMOS) used for memory and microprocessors enabled a significant improvement in price, leading to an explosion in deployment. Currently available wireless technologies, called by the IEEE standard name 802.11ac allow for transmission rates from 1 to 1300 million bits per second. Wireless technology is quite a bit different from wire-based networks, since all users in an immediate area share the airwaves. local area network (LAN)  A network designed to carry data within a geographically confined area, typically within a single building. wide area network (WAN)  A network extended over hundreds of kilometers that can span a continent. Check Yourself ■ Semiconductor DRAM memory, flash memory, and disk storage differ significantly. For each technology, list its volatility, approximate relative access time, and approximate relative cost compared to DRAM. flash memory  A nonvolatile semi- conductor memory. It is cheaper and slower than DRAM but more expensive per bit and faster than magnetic disks. Access times are about 5 to 50 microseconds and cost per gigabyte in 2020 was $0.06 to $0.12.

 1.5  Technologies for Building Processors and Memory 1.5 Technologies for Building Processors and Memory Processors and memory have improved at an incredible rate, because computer designers have long embraced the latest in electronic technology to try to win the race to design a better computer. Figure 1.10 shows the technologies that have been used over time, with an estimate of the relative performance per unit cost for each technology. Since this technology shapes what computers will be able to do and how quickly they will evolve, we believe all computer professionals should be familiar with the basics of integrated circuits. A transistor is simply an on/off switch controlled by electricity. The integrated circuit (IC) combined dozens to hundreds of transistors into a single chip. When Gordon Moore predicted the continuous doubling of resources, he was forecasting the growth rate of the number of transistors per chip. To describe the tremendous increase in the number of transistors from hundreds to millions, the adjective very large scale is added to the term, creating the abbreviation VLSI, for very large-scale integrated circuit. This rate of increasing integration has been remarkably stable. Figure 1.11 shows the growth in DRAM capacity since 1977. For 35 years, the industry has consistently quadrupled capacity every 3 years, resulting in an increase in excess of 16,000 times! Figure 1.11 shows the slowdown due to the slowing of Moore’s Law; quadrupling capacity has taken six years recently. To understand how to manufacture integrated circuits, we start at the beginning. The manufacture of a chip begins with silicon, a substance found in sand. Because silicon does not conduct electricity well, it is called a semiconductor. With a special chemical process, it is possible to add materials to silicon that allow tiny areas to transform into one of three devices: ■ Excellent conductors of electricity (using either microscopic copper or aluminum wire) ■ Excellent insulators from electricity (like plastic sheathing or glass) ■ Areas that can conduct or insulate under specific conditions (as a switch) Transistors fall into the last category. A VLSI circuit, then, is just billions of combinations of conductors, insulators, and switches manufactured in a single small package. transistor  An on/off switch controlled by an electric signal. very large-scale integrated (VLSI) circuit  A device containing hundreds of thousands to millions of transistors. silicon  A natural element that is a semiconductor. semiconductor  A substance that does not conduct electricity well. Vacuum tube Integrated circuit Very large-scale integrated circuit Ultra large-scale integrated circuit Transistor 2,400,000 500,000,000,000 FIGURE 1.10  Relative performance per unit cost of technologies used in computers over time. Source: Computer Museum, Boston, with 2013 extrapolated by the authors. See Section 1.13.

Chapter 1  Computer Abstractions and Technology The manufacturing process for integrated circuits is critical to the cost of the chips and hence important to computer designers. Figure 1.12 shows that process. The process starts with a silicon crystal ingot, which looks like a giant sausage. Today, ingots are 8–12 inches in diameter and about 12–24 inches long. An ingot is finely sliced into wafers no more than 0.1 inches thick. These wafers then go through a series of processing steps, during which patterns of chemicals are placed on each wafer, creating the transistors, conductors, and insulators discussed earlier. Today’s integrated circuits contain only one layer of transistors but may have from two to eight levels of metal conductor, separated by layers of insulators. silicon crystal ingot  A rod composed of a silicon crystal that is between 8 and 12 inches in diameter and about 12 to 24 inches long. wafer  A slice from a silicon ingot no more than 0.1 inches thick, used to create chips. 1,000,000 10,000,000 100,000,000 1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 Year of introduction 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 Kibibit capacity 16K 64K 256K 1M 4M 16M 64M 128M256M 512M 1G 2G 4G 100,000 10,000 2014 2016 2018 2020 8G 16G FIGURE 1.11  Growth of capacity per DRAM chip over time. The y-axis is measured in kibibits (210 bits). The DRAM industry quadrupled capacity almost every three years, a 60% increase per year, for 20 years. In recent years, the rate has slowed down and is somewhat closer to doubling every three years. With the slowing of Moore’s Law and difficulties in reliable manufacturing of smaller DRAM cells given the challenging aspect ratios of their three-dimensional structure. Slicer Dicer 20 to 40 processing steps Bond die to package Silicon ingot Wafer tester Part tester Ship to customers Tested dies Tested wafer Blank wafers Packaged dies Patterned wafers Tested packaged dies FIGURE 1.12  The chip manufacturing process. After being sliced from the silicon ingot, blank wafers are put through 20 to 40 steps to create patterned wafers (see Figure 1.13). These patterned wafers are then tested with a wafer tester, and a map of the good parts is made. Next, the wafers are diced into dies (see Figure 1.9). In this figure, one wafer produced 20 dies, of which 17 passed testing. (X means the die is bad.) The yield of good dies in this case was 17/20, or 85%. These good dies are then bonded into packages and tested one more time before shipping the packaged parts to customers. One bad packaged part was found in this final test.

 1.5  Technologies for Building Processors and Memory A single microscopic flaw in the wafer itself or in one of the dozens of patterning steps can result in that area of the wafer failing. These defects, as they are called, make it virtually impossible to manufacture a perfect wafer. The simplest way to cope with imperfection is to place many independent components on a single wafer. The patterned wafer is then chopped up, or diced, into these components, called dies and more informally known as chips. Figure 1.13 shows a photograph of a wafer containing microprocessors before they have been diced; earlier, Figure 1.9 shows an individual microprocessor die. Dicing enables you to discard only those dies that were unlucky enough to contain the flaws, rather than the whole wafer. This concept is quantified by the yield of a process, which is defined as the percentage of good dies from the total number of dies on the wafer. The cost of an integrated circuit rises quickly as the die size increases, due both to the lower yield and to the fewer dies that fit on a wafer. To reduce the cost, using the next generation process shrinks a large die as it uses smaller sizes for both transistors and wires. This improves the yield and the die count per wafer. A 7-nanometer (nm) process was state-of-the-art in 2020, which means essentially that the smallest feature size on the die is 7 nm. defect  A microscopic flaw in a wafer or in patterning steps that can result in the failure of the die containing that defect. die  The individual rectangular sections that are cut from a wafer, more informally known as chips. yield  The percentage of good dies from the total number of dies on the wafer. FIGURE 1.13  A 12-inch (300mm) wafer this 10nm wafer contains 10th Gen Intel® Core™ processors, code-named “Ice Lake” (Courtesy Intel). The number of dies on this 300 mm (12 inch) wafer at 100% yield is 506. According to AnandTech1, each Ice Lake die is 11.4 by 10.7 mm. The several dozen partially rounded chips at the boundaries of the wafer are useless; they are included because it’s easier to create the masks used to pattern the silicon. This die uses a 10-nanometer technology, which means that the smallest features are approximately 10 nm in size, although they are typically somewhat smaller than the actual feature size, which refers to the size of the transistors as “drawn” versus the final manufactured size.

Chapter 1  Computer Abstractions and Technology Once you’ve found good dies, they are connected to the input/output pins of a package, using a process called bonding. These packaged parts are tested a final time, since mistakes can occur in packaging, and then they are shipped to customers. While we have talked about the cost of chips, there is a difference between cost and price. Companies charge as much as the market will bear to maximize return on investment, which must cover costs like a company’s research and development (R&D), marketing, sales, manufacturing equipment maintenance, building rental, cost of financing, pretax profits, and taxes. Margins can be higher on unique chips that come from only one company, like microprocessors, versus chips that are commodities supplied by several companies, like DRAMs. The price fluctuates based on the ratio of supply and demand, and it is easy for multiple companies to build more chips than the market demands. Elaboration:  The cost of an integrated circuit can be expressed in three simple equations: Cost per die Cost per wafer Dies per wafer yield Dies per wafer Wafer area Die area Yield Defects per area Die are  ( ( a))N The first equation is straightforward to derive. The second is an approximation, since it does not subtract the area near the border of the round wafer that cannot accommodate the rectangular dies (see Figure 1.13). The final equation is based on empirical observations of yields at integrated circuit factories, with the exponent related to the number of critical processing steps. Hence, depending on the defect rate and the size of the die and wafer, costs are generally not linear in the die area. Check Yourself A key factor in determining the cost of an integrated circuit is volume. Which of the following are reasons why a chip made in high volume should cost less? 1. With high volumes, the manufacturing process can be tuned to a particular design, increasing the yield. 2. It is less work to design a high-volume part than a low-volume part. 3. The masks used to make the chip are expensive, so the cost per chip is lower for higher volumes. 4. Engineering development costs are high and largely independent of volume; thus, the development cost per die is lower with high-volume parts. 5. High-volume parts usually have smaller die sizes than low-volume parts and therefore, have higher yield per wafer.

 1.6  Performance 1.6 Performance Assessing the performance of computers can be quite challenging. The scale and intricacy of modern software systems, together with the wide range of performance improvement techniques employed by hardware designers, have made performance assessment much more difficult. When trying to choose among different computers, performance is an important attribute. Accurately measuring and comparing different computers is critical to purchasers and therefore, to designers. The people selling computers know this as well. Often, salespeople would like you to see their computer in the best possible light, whether or not this light accurately reflects the needs of the purchaser’s application. Hence, understanding how best to measure performance and the limitations of those measurements is important in selecting a computer. The rest of this section describes different ways in which performance can be determined; then, we describe the metrics for measuring performance from the viewpoint of both a computer user and a designer. We also look at how these metrics are related and present the classical processor performance equation, which we will use throughout the text. Defining Performance When we say one computer has better performance than another, what do we mean? Although this question might seem simple, an analogy with passenger airplanes shows how subtle the question of performance can be. Figure 1.14 lists some typical passenger airplanes, together with their cruising speed, range, and capacity. If we wanted to know which of the planes in this table had the best performance, we would first need to define performance. For example, considering different measures of performance, we see that the plane with the highest cruising speed was the Concorde (retired from service in 2003), the plane with the longest range is the Boeing 777- 200LR, and the plane with the largest capacity is the Airbus A380-800. Let’s suppose we define performance in terms of speed. This still leaves two possible definitions. You could define the fastest plane as the one with the highest Airplane Passenger capacity Cruising range (miles) Cruising speed (m.p.h.) Passenger throughput (passengers × m.p.h.) Boeing 737 135,360 BAC/Sud Concorde 178,200 Boeing 777-200LR 166,761 Airbus A380-800 500,711 FIGURE 1.14  The capacity, range, and speed for a number of commercial airplanes. The last column shows the rate at which the airplane transports passengers, which is the capacity times the cruising speed (ignoring range and takeoff and landing times).

Chapter 1  Computer Abstractions and Technology cruising speed, taking a single passenger from one point to another in the least time. If you were interested in transporting 500 passengers from one point to another, however, the Airbus A380-800 would clearly be the fastest, as the last column of the figure shows. Similarly, we can define computer performance in several distinct ways. If you were running a program on two different desktop computers, you’d say that the faster one is the desktop computer that gets the job done first. If you were running a datacenter that had several servers running jobs submitted by many users, you’d say that the faster computer was the one that completed the most jobs during a day. As an individual computer user, you are interested in reducing response time—the time between the start and completion of a task—also referred to as execution time. Datacenter managers often care about increasing throughput or bandwidth—the total amount of work done in a given time. Hence, in most cases, we will need different performance metrics as well as different sets of applications to benchmark personal mobile devices, which are more focused on response time, versus servers, which are more focused on throughput. Throughput and Response Time Do the following changes to a computer system increase throughput, decrease response time, or both? 1. Replacing the processor in a computer with a faster version 2. Adding additional processors to a system that uses multiple processors for separate tasks—for example, searching the web Decreasing response time almost always improves throughput. Hence, in case 1, both response time and throughput are improved. In case 2, no one task gets work done faster, so only throughput increases. If, however, the demand for processing in the second case was almost as large as the throughput, the system might force requests to queue up. In this case, increasing the throughput could also improve response time, since it would reduce the waiting time in the queue. Thus, in many real computer systems, changing either execution time or throughput often affects the other. In discussing the performance of computers, we will be primarily concerned with response time for the first few chapters. To maximize performance, we want to minimize response time or execution time for some task. Thus, we can relate performance and execution time for a computer X: Performance Executiontime X X  This means that for two computers X and Y, if the performance of X is greater than the performance of Y, we have throughput  Also called bandwidth. Another measure of performance, it is the number of tasks completed per unit time. response time  Also called execution time. The total time required for the computer to complete a task, including disk accesses, memory accesses, I/O activities, operating system overhead, CPU execution time, and so on. EXAMPLE ANSWER

 1.6  Performance Performance Performance Executiontime Executiontime Ex X Y X Y   ecution time Executiontime Y X  That is, the execution time on Y is longer than that on X, if X is faster than Y. In discussing a computer design, we often want to relate the performance of two different computers quantitatively. We will use the phrase “X is n times faster than Y”—or equivalently “X is n times as fast as Y”—to mean Performance Performance X Y  n If X is n times as fast as Y, then the execution time on Y is n times as long as it is on X: Performance Performance Execution time Execution time X Y Y X   n Relative Performance If computer A runs a program in 10 seconds and computer B runs the same program in 15 seconds, how much faster is A than B? We know that A is n times as fast as B if Performance Performance Executiontime Execution time A B B A   n Thus the performance ratio is 1 5  . and A is therefore 1.5 times as fast as B. In the above example, we could also say that computer B is 1.5 times slower than computer A, since Performance Performance A B  1 5. EXAMPLE ANSWER

Chapter 1  Computer Abstractions and Technology means that Performance Performance A B 1 5.  For simplicity, we will normally use the terminology as fast as when we try to compare computers quantitatively. Because performance and execution time are reciprocals, increasing performance requires decreasing execution time. To avoid the potential confusion between the terms increasing and decreasing, we usually say “improve performance” or “improve execution time” when we mean “increase performance” and “decrease execution time.” Measuring Performance Time is the measure of computer performance: the computer that performs the same amount of work in the least time is the fastest. Program execution time is measured in seconds per program. However, time can be defined in different ways, depending on what we count. The most straightforward definition of time is called wall clock time, response time, or elapsed time. These terms mean the total time to complete a task, including disk accesses, memory accesses, input/output (I/O) activities, operating system overhead—everything. Computers are often shared, however, and a processor may work on several programs simultaneously. In such cases, the system may try to optimize throughput rather than attempt to minimize the elapsed time for one program. Hence, we might want to distinguish between the elapsed time and the time over which the processor is working on our behalf. CPU execution time or simply CPU time, which recognizes this distinction, is the time the CPU spends computing for this task and does not include time spent waiting for I/O or running other programs. (Remember, though, that the response time experienced by the user will be the elapsed time of the program, not the CPU time.) CPU time can be further divided into the CPU time spent in the program, called user CPU time, and the CPU time spent in the operating system performing tasks on behalf of the program, called system CPU time. Differentiating between system and user CPU time is difficult to do accurately, because it is often hard to assign responsibility for operating system activities to one user program rather than another and because of the functionality differences between operating systems. For consistency, we maintain a distinction between performance based on elapsed time and that based on CPU execution time. We will use the term system performance to refer to elapsed time on an unloaded system and CPU performance to refer to user CPU time. We will focus on CPU performance in this chapter, although our discussions of how to summarize performance can be applied to either elapsed time or CPU time measurements. CPU execution time  Also called CPU time. The actual time the CPU spends computing for a specific task. user CPU time  The CPU time spent in a program itself. system CPU time  The CPU time spent in the operating system performing tasks on behalf of the program. Different applications are sensitive to different aspects of the performance of a computer system. Many applications, especially those running on servers, depend as much on I/O performance, which, in turn, relies on both hardware and software. Total elapsed time measured by a wall clock is the measurement of interest. In Understanding Program Performance

 1.6  Performance Although as computer users we care about time, when we examine the details of a computer it’s convenient to think about performance in other metrics. In particular, computer designers may want to think about a computer by using a measure that relates to how fast the hardware can perform basic functions. Almost all computers are constructed using a clock that determines when events take place in the hardware. These discrete time intervals are called clock cycles (or ticks, clock ticks, clock periods, clocks, cycles). Designers refer to the length of a clock period both as the time for a complete clock cycle (e.g., 250 picoseconds, or 250 ps) and as the clock rate (e.g., 4 gigahertz, or 4 GHz), which is the inverse of the clock period. In the next subsection, we will formalize the relationship between the clock cycles of the hardware designer and the seconds of the computer user. clock cycle  Also called tick, clock tick, clock period, clock, or cycle. The time for one clock period, usually of the processor clock, which runs at a constant rate. clock period  The length of each clock cycle. some application environments, the user may care about throughput, response time, or a complex combination of the two (e.g., maximum throughput with a worst-case response time). To improve the performance of a program, one must have a clear definition of what performance metric matters and then proceed to find performance bottlenecks by measuring program execution and looking for the likely bottlenecks. In the following chapters, we will describe how to search for bottlenecks and improve performance in various parts of the system. 1. Suppose we know that an application that uses both personal mobile devices and the Cloud is limited by network performance. For the following changes, state whether only the throughput improves, both response time and throughput improve, or neither improves. a. An extra network channel is added between the PMD and the Cloud, increasing the total network throughput and reducing the delay to obtain network access (since there are now two channels). b. The networking software is improved, thereby reducing the network communication delay, but not increasing throughput. c. More memory is added to the computer. 2. Computer C’s performance is four times as fast as the performance of computer B, which runs a given application in 28 seconds. How long will computer C take to run that application? CPU Performance and Its Factors Users and designers often examine performance using different metrics. If we could relate these different metrics, we could determine the effect of a design change on the performance as experienced by the user. Since we are confining ourselves to CPU performance at this point, the bottom-line performance measure is CPU Check Yourself

Chapter 1  Computer Abstractions and Technology execution time. A simple formula relates the most basic metrics (clock cycles and clock cycle time) to CPU time: CPUexecution time fora program CPUclock cycles fora program Clo   ck cycletime Alternatively, because clock rate and clock cycle time are inverses, CPUexecutiontime fora program CPUclock cyclesfora program Clock  rate This formula makes it clear that the hardware designer can improve performance by reducing the number of clock cycles required for a program or the length of the clock cycle. As we will see in later chapters, the designer often faces a trade-off between the number of clock cycles needed for a program and the length of each cycle. Many techniques that decrease the number of clock cycles may also increase the clock cycle time. Improving Performance Our favorite program runs in 10 seconds on computer A, which has a 2 GHz clock. We are trying to help a computer designer build a computer, B, which will run this program in 6 seconds. The designer has determined that a substantial increase in the clock rate is possible, but this increase will affect the rest of the CPU design, causing computer B to require 1.2 times as many clock cycles as computer A for this program. What clock rate should we tell the designer to target? Let’s first find the number of clock cycles required for the program on A: CPUtime CPUclock cycles Clockrate seconds CPUclock cycles A A A   A A cycles second CPUclock cycles seconds cycles se     cond cycles   EXAMPLE ANSWER

 1.6  Performance CPU time for B can be found using this equation: CPU time CPU clock cycles Clock rate B A B 1 2. seconds 1 2 . 109 cycles Clock rateB 1 2 Clock rate cycles seco B . nds cycles second cycles second GHz 0 2 . To run the program in 6 seconds, B must have twice the clock rate of A. Instruction Performance The performance equations above did not include any reference to the number of instructions needed for the program. However, since the compiler clearly generated instructions to execute, and the computer had to execute the instructions to run the program, the execution time must depend on the number of instructions in a program. One way to think about execution time is that it equals the number of instructions executed multiplied by the average time per instruction. Therefore, the number of clock cycles required for a program can be written as CPUclock cycles Instructions fora program Averageclock cycles   per instruction The term clock cycles per instruction, which is the average number of clock cycles each instruction takes to execute, is often abbreviated as CPI. Since different instructions may take different amounts of time depending on what they do, CPI is an average of all the instructions executed in the program. CPI provides one way of comparing two different implementations of the identical instruction set architecture, since the number of instructions executed for a program will, of course, be the same. Using the Performance Equation Suppose we have two implementations of the same instruction set architecture. Computer A has a clock cycle time of 250 ps and a CPI of 2.0 for some program, and computer B has a clock cycle time of 500 ps and a CPI of 1.2 for the same program. Which computer is faster for this program and by how much? clock cycles per instruction (CPI)  Average number of clock cycles per instruction for a program or program fragment. EXAMPLE

Chapter 1  Computer Abstractions and Technology We know that each computer executes the same number of instructions for the program; let’s call this number I. First, find the number of processor clock cycles for each computer: CPUclock cycles CPUclock cycles A B     I I 2 0 1 2 . . Now we can compute the CPU time for each computer: CPU time CPU clock cycles Clock cycle time ps A A       I 2 0 . 500  I ps Likewise, for B: CPUtime ps ps B      I I 1 2 . Clearly, computer A is faster. The amount faster is given by the ratio of the execution times: CPUperformance CPUperformance Executiontime Execution tim A B B  e ps ps A     1 2 I I . We can conclude that computer A is 1.2 times as fast as computer B for this program. The Classic CPU Performance Equation We can now write this basic performance equation in terms of instruction count (the number of instructions executed by the program), CPI, and clock cycle time: CPUtime Instructioncount CPI Clock cycletime    or, since the clock rate is the inverse of clock cycle time: CPUtime Instructioncount CPI Clockrate   These formulas are particularly useful because they separate the three key factors that affect performance. We can use these formulas to compare two different implementations or to evaluate a design alternative if we know its impact on these three parameters. instruction count  The number of instructions executed by the program. ANSWER

 1.6  Performance Comparing Code Segments A compiler designer is trying to decide between two code sequences for a computer. The hardware designers have supplied the following facts: CPI for each instruction class A B C CPI For a particular high-level language statement, the compiler writer is considering two code sequences that require the following instruction counts: Instruction counts for each instruction class Code sequence A B C Which code sequence executes the most instructions? Which will be faster? What is the CPI for each sequence? Sequence 1 executes 2 + 1 + 2 = 5 instructions. Sequence 2 executes 4 + 1 + 1 = 6 instructions. Therefore, sequence 1 executes fewer instructions. We can use the equation for CPU clock cycles based on instruction count and CPI to find the total number of clock cycles for each sequence: CPUclock cycles CPI C ( ) i i i=1 n∑ This yields CPUclock cycles cycles CPUclock cy           ( ) ( ) ( ) cles cycles           ( ) ( ) ( ) So code sequence 2 is faster, even though it executes one extra instruction. Since code sequence 2 takes fewer overall clock cycles but has more instructions, it must have a lower CPI. The CPI values can be computed by CPI CPU clock cycles Instruction count CPI CPU clock cycles   2 0 Instruction count CPI CPU clock cycles Instruct    . ion count2 1 5   . EXAMPLE ANSWER

Chapter 1  Computer Abstractions and Technology Figure 1.15 shows the basic measurements at different levels in the computer and what is being measured in each case. We can see how these factors are combined to yield execution time measured in seconds per program: nd Time Seconds/Program Instructions Program Clock cycles Instruction Seco s Clock cycle Always bear in mind that the only complete and reliable measure of computer performance is time. For example, changing the instruction set to lower the instruction count may lead to an organization with a slower clock cycle time or higher CPI that offsets the improvement in instruction count. Similarly, because CPI depends on the type of instructions executed, the code that executes the fewest number of instructions may not be the fastest. How can we determine the value of these factors in the performance equation? We can measure the CPU execution time by running the program, and the clock cycle time is usually published as part of the documentation for a computer. The instruction count and CPI can be more difficult to obtain. Of course, if we know the clock rate and CPU execution time, we need only one of the instruction count or the CPI to determine the other. We can measure the instruction count by using software tools that profile the execution or by using a simulator of the architecture. Alternatively, we can use hardware counters, which are included in most processors, to record a variety of measurements, including the number of instructions executed, the average CPI, and often, the sources of performance loss. Since the instruction count depends on the architecture, but not on the exact implementation, we can measure the instruction count without knowing all the details of the implementation. The CPI, however, depends on a wide variety of design details in the computer, including both the memory system and the processor structure (as we will see in Chapter 4 and Chapter 5), as well as on the mix of instruction types executed in an application. Thus, CPI varies by application, as well as among implementations with the same instruction set. The BIG Picture CPU execution time for a program Seconds for the program Instruction count Instructions executed for the program Clock cycles per instruction (CPI) Average number of clock cycles per instruction Clock cycle time Seconds per clock cycle FIGURE 1.15  The basic components of performance and how each is measured.

 1.6  Performance The above example shows the danger of using only one factor (instruction count) to assess performance. When comparing two computers, you must look at all three components, which combine to form execution time. If some of the factors are identical, like the clock rate in the above example, performance can be determined by comparing all the nonidentical factors. Since CPI varies by instruction mix, both instruction count and CPI must be compared, even if clock rates are equal. Several exercises at the end of this chapter ask you to evaluate a series of computer and compiler enhancements that affect clock rate, CPI, and instruction count. In Section 1.10, we’ll examine a common performance measurement that does not incorporate all the terms and can thus be misleading. instruction mix  A measure of the dynamic frequency of instructions across one or many programs. The performance of a program depends on the algorithm, the language, the compiler, the architecture, and the actual hardware. The following table summarizes how these components affect the factors in the CPU performance equation. Hardware or software component Affects what? How? Algorithm Instruction count, CPI The algorithm determines the number of source program instructions executed and hence the number of processor instructions executed. The algorithm may also affect the CPI, by favoring slower or faster instructions. For example, if the algorithm uses more divides, it will tend to have a higher CPI. Programming language Instruction count, CPI The programming language certainly affects the instruction count, since statements in the language are translated to processor instructions, which determine instruction count. The language may also affect the CPI because of its features; for example, a language with heavy support for data abstraction (e.g., Java) will require indirect calls, which will use higher CPI instructions. Compiler Instruction count, CPI The efficiency of the compiler affects both the instruction count and average cycles per instruction, since the compiler determines the translation of the source language instructions into computer instructions. The compiler’s role can be very complex and affect the CPI in varied ways. Instruction set architecture Instruction count, clock rate, CPI The instruction set architecture affects all three aspects of CPU performance, since it affects the instructions needed for a function, the cost in cycles of each instruction, and the overall clock rate of the processor. Elaboration:  Although you might expect that the minimum CPI is 1.0, as we’ll see in Chapter 4, some processors fetch and execute multiple instructions per clock cycle. To reflect that approach, some designers invert CPI to talk about IPC, or instructions per clock cycle. If a processor executes on average two instructions per clock cycle, then it has an IPC of 2 and hence a CPI of 0.5. Understanding Program Performance

Chapter 1  Computer Abstractions and Technology Elaboration:  Although clock cycle time has traditionally been fixed, to save energy or temporarily boost performance, today’s processors can vary their clock rates, so we would need to use the average clock rate for a program. For example, the Intel Core i7 will temporarily increase clock rate by about 10% until the chip gets too warm. Intel calls this Turbo mode. 1.7 The Power Wall Figure 1.16 shows the increase in clock rate and power of nine generations of Intel microprocessors over 36 years. Both clock rate and power increased rapidly for decades and then flattened or dropped off recently. The reason they grew together is that they are correlated, and the reason for their recent slowing is that we have run into the practical power limit for cooling commodity microprocessors. A given application written in Java runs 15 seconds on a desktop processor. A new Java compiler is released that requires only 0.6 as many instructions as the old compiler. Unfortunately, it increases the CPI by 1.1. How fast can we expect the application to run using this new compiler? Pick the right answer from the three choices below: a. 0 6 1 1 8.2 sec . . b. 15 0 6 1 1 . . 9.9 sec c. 1 5 1 1 0 6 27.5 sec . . . 12.5 75.3 29.1 10.1 4.9 4.1 3.3 10,000 80286 (1982) 80386 (1985) 80486 (1989) Pentium (1993) Pentium Pro (1997) Pentium 4 Willamette (2001) Pentium 4 Prescott (2004) Core 2 Kentsfield (2007) Clock Rate (MHz) Power (watts) Clock Rate Power Core i5 Clarkdale (2010) Core i5 Haswell (2013) Core i5 Skylake (2016) Core i5 Coffee Lake (2018) FIGURE 1.16  Clock rate and power for Intel x86 microprocessors over nine generations and 36 years. The Pentium 4 made a dramatic jump in clock rate and power but less so in performance. The Prescott thermal problems led to the abandonment of the Pentium 4 line. The Core 2 line reverts to a simpler pipeline with lower clock rates and multiple processors per chip. The Core i5 pipelines follow in its footsteps. Check Yourself

 1.7  The Power Wall Although power provides a limit to what we can cool, in the post-PC era the really valuable resource is energy. Battery life can trump performance in the personal mobile device, and the architects of warehouse scale computers try to reduce the costs of powering and cooling 50,000 servers as the costs are high at this scale. Just as measuring time in seconds is a safer evaluation of program performance than a rate like MIPS (see Section 1.10), the energy metric joules is a better measure than a power rate like watts, which is just joules/second. The dominant technology for integrated circuits is called CMOS (complementary metal oxide semiconductor). For CMOS, the primary source of energy consumption is so-called dynamic energy—that is, energy that is consumed when transistors switch states from 0 to 1 and vice versa. The dynamic energy depends on the capacitive loading of each transistor and the voltage applied: Energy Capacitive load Voltage ∝ This equation is the energy of a pulse during the logic transition of 0 → 1 → 0 or 1 → 0 → 1. The energy of a single transition is then Energy Capacitive load Voltage ∝1 2 / The power required per transistor is just the product of energy of a transition and the frequency of transitions: Power Capacitiveload Voltage Frequency switched ∝1 2 / Frequency switched is a function of the clock rate. The capacitive load per transistor is a function of both the number of transistors connected to an output (called the fanout) and the technology, which determines the capacitance of both wires and transistors. With regard to Figure 1.16, how could clock rates grow by a factor of 1000 while power increased by only a factor of 30? Energy and thus power can be reduced by lowering the voltage, which occurred with each new generation of technology, and power is a function of the voltage squared. Typically, the voltage was reduced about 15% per generation. In 20 years, voltages have gone from 5 V to 1 V, which is why the increase in power is only 30 times. Relative Power Suppose we developed a new, simpler processor that has 85% of the capacitive load of the more complex older processor. Further, assume that it can adjust voltage so that it can reduce voltage 15% compared to processor B, which results in a 15% shrink in frequency. What is the impact on dynamic power? EXAMPLE

Chapter 1  Computer Abstractions and Technology Power Power Capacitive load Voltage F new old 0 85 0 85 2 . . requency switched Capacitive load Voltage Frequency 0 85 . switched Thus the power ratio is 0 85 0 52 . .  Hence, the new processor uses about half the power of the old processor. The modern problem is that further lowering of the voltage appears to make the transistors too leaky, like water faucets that cannot be completely shut off. Even today about 40% of the power consumption in server chips is due to leakage. If transistors started leaking more, the whole process could become unwieldy. To try to address the power problem, designers have already attached large devices to increase cooling, and they turn off parts of the chip that are not used in a given clock cycle. Although there are many more expensive ways to cool chips and thereby raise their power to, say, 300 watts, these techniques are generally too costly for personal computers and even servers, not to mention personal mobile devices. Since computer designers slammed into a power wall, they needed a new way forward. They chose a different path from the way they designed microprocessors for their first 30 years. Elaboration:  Although dynamic energy is the primary source of energy consumption in CMOS, static energy consumption occurs because of leakage current that flows even when a transistor is off. In servers, leakage is typically responsible for 40% of the energy consumption. Thus, increasing the number of transistors increases power dissipation, even if the transistors are always off. A variety of design techniques and technology innovations are being deployed to control leakage, but it’s hard to lower voltage further. Elaboration:  Power is a challenge for integrated circuits for two reasons. First, power must be brought in and distributed around the chip; modern microprocessors use hundreds of pins just for power and ground! Similarly, multiple levels of chip interconnection are used solely for power and ground distribution to portions of the chip. Second, power is dissipated as heat and must be removed. Server chips can burn more than 100 watts, and cooling the chip and the surrounding system is a major expense in warehouse scale computers (see Chapter 6). ANSWER

 1.8  The Sea Change: The Switch from Uniprocessors to Multiprocessors 1.8 The Sea Change: The Switch from Uniprocessors to Multiprocessors The power limit has forced a dramatic change in the design of microprocessors. Figure 1.17 shows the improvement in response time of programs for desktop microprocessors over time. Since 2002, the rate has slowed from a factor of 1.5 per year to a factor of only 1.03 per year. Rather than continuing to decrease the response time of one program running on the single processor, as of 2006 all desktop and server companies are shipping microprocessors with multiple processors per chip, where the benefit is often more on throughput than on response time. To reduce confusion between the words processor and microprocessor, companies refer to processors as “cores,” and such microprocessors are generically called multicore microprocessors. Hence, a “quadcore” microprocessor is a chip that contains four processors or four cores. In the past, programmers could rely on innovations in hardware, architecture, and compilers to double performance of their programs every 18 months without having to change a line of code. Today, for programmers to get significant improvement in response time, they need to rewrite their programs to take advantage of multiple processors. Moreover, to get the historic benefit of running faster on new microprocessors, programmers will have to continue to improve the performance of their code as the number of cores increases. To reinforce how the software and hardware systems work together, we use a special section, Hardware/Software Interface, throughout the book, with the first one appearing below. These elements summarize important insights at this critical interface. Parallelism has always been crucial to performance in computing, but it was often hidden. Chapter 4 will explain pipelining, an elegant technique that runs programs faster by overlapping the execution of instructions. Pipelining is one example of instruction-level parallelism, where the parallel nature of the hardware is abstracted away so the programmer and compiler can think of the hardware as executing instructions sequentially. Forcing programmers to be aware of the parallel hardware and to rewrite their programs to be parallel had been the “third rail” of computer architecture, for companies in the past that depended on such a change in behavior failed (see Section 6.15). From this historical perspective, it’s startling that the whole IT industry bet its future that programmers will successfully switch to explicitly parallel programming. Hardware/ Software Interface Up to now, most software has been like music written for a solo performer; with the current generation of chips we’re getting a little experience with duets and quartets and other small ensembles; but scoring a work for large orchestra and chorus is a different kind of challenge. Brian Hayes, Computing in a Parallel Universe, 2007.

Chapter 1  Computer Abstractions and Technology Why has it been so hard for programmers to write explicitly parallel programs? The first reason is that parallel programming is by definition performance programming, which increases the difficulty of programming. Not only does the program need to be correct, solve an important problem, and provide a useful interface to the people or other programs that invoke it; the program must also be fast. Otherwise, if you don’t need performance, just write a sequential program. The second reason is that fast for parallel hardware means that the programmer must divide an application so that each processor has roughly the same amount to do at the same time, and that the overhead of scheduling and coordination doesn’t fritter away the potential performance benefits of parallelism. As an analogy, suppose the task was to write a newspaper story. Eight reporters working on the same story could potentially write a story eight times faster. To achieve this increased speed, one would need to break up the task so that each reporter had something to do at the same time. Thus, we must schedule the sub-tasks. If anything went wrong and just one reporter took longer than the seven others did, then the benefits of having eight writers would be diminished. Thus, we must balance the 1,267 1,779 3,016 4,195 6,043 6,681 7,108 11,86514,387 19,484 21,871 24,129 31,999 34,967 39,419 40,967 49,935 49,935 49,870 10,000 100,000 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 Performance (vs. VAX-11/780) 25%/year 52%/year 23%/year 12%/year 3.5%/year IBM POWERstation 100, 150 MHz Digital Alphastation 4/266, 266 MHz Digital Alphastation 5/300, 300 MHz Digital Alphastation 5/500, 500 MHz AlphaServer 4000 5/600, 600 MHz 21164 Digital AlphaServer 8400 6/575, 575 MHz 21264 Professional Workstation XP1000, 667 MHz 21264A Intel VC820 motherboard, 1.0 GHz Pentium III processor IBM Power4, 1.3 GHz Intel Xeon EE 3.2 GHz AMD Athlon, 2.6 GHz Intel Core 2 Extreme 2 cores, 2.9 GHz Intel Core Duo Extreme 2 cores, 3.0 GHz Intel Core i7 Extreme 4 cores 3.2 GHz (boost to 3.5 GHz) Intel Core i7 4 cores 3.4 GHz (boost to 3.8 GHz) Intel Xeon 4 cores 3.6 GHz (Boost to 4.0 GHz) Intel Xeon 4 cores 3.6 GHz (Boost to 4.0 GHz) Intel Xeon 4 cores 3.7 GHz (Boost to 4.1 GHz) Intel Core i7 4 cores 4.0 GHz (Boost to 4.2 GHz) Intel Core i7 4 cores 4.0 GHz (Boost to 4.2 GHz) Intel Core i7 4 cores 4.2 GHz (Boost to 4.5 GHz) Intel Xeon 4 cores, 3.3 GHz (boost to 3.6 GHz) Intel Xeon 6 cores, 3.3 GHz (boost to 3.6 GHz) Intel D850EMVR motherboard (3.06 GHz, Pentium 4 processor with Hyper-Threading Technology) AMD Athlon 64, 2.8 GHz Digital 3000 AXP/500, 150 MHz HP 9000/750, 66 MHz IBM RS6000/540, 30 MHz MIPS M2000, 25 MHz MIPS M/120, 16.7 MHz Sun-4/260, 16.7 MHz VAX 8700, 22 MHz AX-11/780, 5 MHz FIGURE 1.17  Growth in processor performance since the mid-1980s. This chart plots performance relative to the VAX 11/780 as measured by the SPECint benchmarks (see Section 1.11). Prior to the mid-1980s, processor performance growth was largely technology- driven and averaged about 25% per year. The increase in growth to about 52% since then is attributable to more advanced architectural and organizational ideas. The higher annual performance improvement of 52% since the mid-1980s meant performance was about a factor of seven larger in 2002 than it would have been had it stayed at 25%. Since 2002, the limits of power, available instruction-level parallelism, and long memory latency have slowed uniprocessor performance recently, to about 3.5% per year.

 1.8  The Sea Change: The Switch from Uniprocessors to Multiprocessors load evenly to get the desired speedup. Another danger would be if reporters had to spend a lot of time talking to each other to write their sections. You would also fall short if one part of the story, such as the conclusion, couldn’t be written until all the other parts were completed. Thus, care must be taken to reduce communication and synchronization overhead. For both this analogy and parallel programming, the challenges include scheduling, load balancing, time for synchronization, and overhead for communication between the parties. As you might guess, the challenge is stiffer with more reporters for a newspaper story and more processors for parallel programming. To reflect this sea change in the industry, the next five chapters in this edition of the book each has a section on the implications of the parallel revolution to that chapter: ■ Chapter 2, Section 2.11: Parallelism and Instructions: Synchronization. Usually independent parallel tasks need to coordinate at times, such as to say when they have completed their work. This chapter explains the instructions used by multicore processors to synchronize tasks. ■ Chapter  3, Section 3.6: Parallelism and Computer Arithmetic: Subword Parallelism. Perhaps the simplest form of parallelism to build involves computing on elements in parallel, such as when multiplying two vectors. Subword parallelism relies on wider arithmetic units that can operate on many operands simultaneously. ■ Chapter 4, Section 4.10: Parallelism via Instructions. Given the difficulty of explicitly parallel programming, tremendous effort was invested in the 1990s in having the hardware and the compiler uncover implicit parallelism, initially via pipelining. This chapter describes some of these aggressive techniques, including fetching and executing multiple instructions concurrently and guessing on the outcomes of decisions, and executing instructions speculatively using prediction. ■ Chapter  5, Section 5.10: Parallelism and Memory Hierarchies: Cache Coherence. One way to lower the cost of communication is to have all processors use the same address space, so that any processor can read or write any data. Given that all processors today use caches to keep a temporary copy of the data in faster memory near the processor, it’s easy to imagine that parallel programming would be even more difficult if the caches associated with each processor had inconsistent values of the shared data. This chapter describes the mechanisms that keep the data in all caches consistent. ■ Chapter  5, Section 5.11: Parallelism and Memory Hierarchy: Redundant Arrays of Inexpensive Disks. This section describes how using many disks in conjunction can offer much higher throughput, which was the original inspiration of Redundant Arrays of Inexpensive Disks (RAID). The real popularity of RAID proved to be the much greater dependability offered by including a modest number of redundant disks. The section explains the differences in performance, cost, and dependability between the various RAID levels.

Chapter 1  Computer Abstractions and Technology In addition to these sections, there is a full chapter on parallel processing. Chapter 6 goes into more detail on the challenges of parallel programming; presents the two contrasting approaches to communication of shared addressing and explicit message passing; describes a restricted model of parallelism that is easier to program; discusses the difficulty of benchmarking parallel processors; introduces a new simple performance model for multicore microprocessors; and, finally, describes and evaluates four examples of multicore microprocessors using this model. As mentioned above, Chapters 3 to 6 use matrix vector multiply as a running example to show how each type of parallelism can significantly increase performance. Appendix B describes an increasingly popular hardware component that is included with desktop computers, the graphics processing unit (GPU). Invented to accelerate graphics, GPUs are becoming programming platforms in their own right. As you might expect, given these times, GPUs rely on parallelism. Appendix B describes the NVIDIA GPU and highlights parts of its parallel programming environment. 1.9 Real Stuff: Benchmarking the Intel Core i7 Each chapter has a section entitled “Real Stuff” that ties the concepts in the book with a computer you may use every day. These sections cover the technology underlying modern computers. For this first “Real Stuff” section, we look at how integrated circuits are manufactured and how performance and power are measured, with the Intel Core i7 as the example. SPEC CPU Benchmark A computer user who runs the same programs day in and day out would be the perfect candidate to evaluate a new computer. The set of programs run would form a workload. To evaluate two computer systems, a user would simply compare the execution time of the workload on the two computers. Most users, however, are not in this situation. Instead, they must rely on other methods that measure the performance of a candidate computer, hoping that the methods will reflect how well the computer will perform with the user’s workload. This alternative is usually followed by evaluating the computer using a set of benchmarks— programs specifically chosen to measure performance. The benchmarks form a workload that the user hopes will predict the performance of the actual workload. As we noted above, to make the common case fast, you first need to know accurately which case is common, so benchmarks play a critical role in computer architecture. SPEC (System Performance Evaluation Cooperative) is an effort funded and supported by a number of computer vendors to create standard sets of benchmarks for modern computer systems. In 1989, SPEC originally created a benchmark set focusing on processor performance (now called SPEC89), which has evolved workload  A set of programs run on a computer that is either the actual collection of applications run by a user or constructed from real programs to approximate such a mix. A typical workload specifies both the programs and the relative frequencies. benchmark  A program selected for use in comparing computer performance. I thought [computers] would be a universally applicable idea, like a book is. But I didn’t think it would develop as fast as it did, because I didn’t envision we’d be able to get as many parts on a chip as we finally got. The transistor came along unexpectedly. It all happened much faster than we expected. J. Presper Eckert, coinventor of ENIAC, speaking in 1991

 1.9  Real Stuff: Benchmarking the Intel Core i7 through five generations. The latest is SPEC CPU2017, which consists of a set of 10 integer benchmarks (SPECspeed 2017 Integer) and 13 floating-point benchmarks (CFP2006). The integer benchmarks vary from part of a C compiler to a chess program to a quantum computer simulation. The floating-point benchmarks include structured grid codes for finite element modeling, particle method codes for molecular dynamics, and sparse linear algebra codes for fluid dynamics. Figure 1.18 describes the SPEC integer benchmarks and their execution time on the Intel Core i7 and shows the factors that explain execution time: instruction count, CPI, and clock cycle time. Note that CPI varies by more than a factor of 4. To simplify the marketing of computers, SPEC decided to report a single number summarizing all 10 integer benchmarks. Dividing the execution time of a reference processor by the execution time of the evaluated computer normalizes the execution time measurements; this normalization yields a measure, called the SPECratio, which has the advantage that bigger numeric results indicate faster performance. That is, the SPECratio is the inverse of execution time. A SPECspeed 2017 summary measurement is obtained by taking the geometric mean of the SPECratios. Elaboration:  When comparing two computers using SPECratios, apply the geometric mean so that it gives the same relative answer no matter what computer is used to normalize the results. If we averaged the normalized execution time values with an arithmetic mean, the results would vary depending on the computer we choose as the reference. Perl interpreter perlbench 0.42 0.556 2.83 GNU C compiler gcc 0.67 0.556 4.61 Route planning mcf 1.22 0.556 3.89 Discrete Event simulation - omnetpp 0.82 0.556 3.21 computer network XML to HTML xalancbmk 0.75 0.556 2.58 conversion via XSLT Video compression x264 0.32 0.556 2.17 Artificial Intelligence: alpha-beta tree deepsjeng 0.57 0.556 2.05 search (Chess) Artificial Intelligence: Monte Carlo tree leela 0.79 0.556 1.73 search (Go) Artificial Intelligence: recursive solution exchange2 0.46 0.556 1.71 generator (Sudoku) General data xz 1.32 0.556 0.98 compression Geometric mean 2.36 – – – – – – FIGURE 1.18  SPECspeed 2017 Integer benchmarks running on a 1.8 GHz Intel Xeon E5-2650L. As the equation on page 35 explains, execution time is the product of the three factors in this table: instruction count in billions, clocks per instruction (CPI), and clock cycle time in nanoseconds. SPECratio is simply the reference time, which is supplied by SPEC, divided by the measured execution time. The single number quoted as SPECspeed 2017 Integer is the geometric mean of the SPECratios. SPECspeed 2017 has multiple input files for perlbench, gcc, x264, and xz. For this figure, execution time and total clock cycles are the sum running times of these programs for all inputs.

Chapter 1  Computer Abstractions and Technology The formula for the geometric mean is Execution time ratioi i n n ∏ where Execution time ratioi is the execution time, normalized to the reference computer, for the ith program of a total of n in the workload, and a a a an i i n means the product 1 … ∏ SPEC Power Benchmark Given the increasing importance of energy and power, SPEC added a benchmark to measure power. It reports power consumption of servers at different workload levels, divided into 10% increments, over a period of time. Figure 1.19 shows the results for a server using Intel Nehalem processors similar to the above. 100% 4,864,136 90% 4,389,196 80% 3,905,724 70% 3,418,737 60% 2,925,811 50% 2,439,017 40% 1,951,394 30% 1,461,411 20% 974,045 10% 485,973 0% Overall Sum 26,815,444 2,165 ∑ssj_ops / ∑power = 12,385 FIGURE 1.19  SPECpower_ssj2008 running on a dual socket 2.2 GHz Intel Xeon Platinum 8276L with 192 GiB of DRAM and one 80 GB SSD disk. SPECpower started with another SPEC benchmark for Java business applications (SPECJBB2005), which exercises the processors, caches, and main memory as well as the Java virtual machine, compiler, garbage collector, and pieces of the operating system. Performance is measured in throughput, and the units are business operations per second. Once again, to simplify the marketing of computers, SPEC 

 1.10  Going Faster: Matrix Multiply in Python boils these numbers down to one number, called “overall ssj_ops per watt.” The formula for this single summarizing metric is overallssj_opsper watt ssj_ops  i i ∑ power   i i ∑ where ssj_opsi is performance at each 10% increment and poweri is power consumed at each performance level. 1.10 Going Faster: Matrix Multiply in Python To demonstrate the impact of the ideas in this book, every chapter has a “Going Faster” section that improves the performance of a program that multiplies a matrix times a vector. We start with this Python program:  We are using the n1-standard-96 server in Google Cloud Engine, which has two Intel Skylake Xeon chips, and each chip has 24 processors or cores and running Python version 3.1. If the matrices are 960 x 960, it takes about 5 minutes to run using Python 2.7. Since floating-point computations go up with the cube of the matrix dimension, it would take almost 6 hours to run if the matrices were 4096 x 4096. While it is quick to write the matrix multiply in Python, who wants to wait that long to get the answer? In Chapter 2, we convert the Python version of matrix multiply to a C version that increases performance by a factor of 200. The C programming abstraction is much closer to the hardware than Python, which is why we use it as the programming example in this book. Closing the abstraction gap also makes it much faster than Python [Leiserson, 2020]. ■ In the category of data-level parallelism, in Chapter 3 we use subword parallelism via C intrinsics to increase performance by a factor of about 8. ■ In the category of instruction-level parallelism, in Chapter 4 we use loop unrolling to exploit multiple instruction issue and out-of-order execution hardware to increase performance by another factor of about 2. ■ In the category of memory hierarchy optimization, in Chapter 5 we use cache blocking to increase performance on large matrices by another factor of about 1.5.

Chapter 1  Computer Abstractions and Technology Science must begin with myths, and the criticism of myths. Sir Karl Popper, The Philosophy of Science, ■ In the category of thread-level parallelism, in Chapter 6 we use parallel for loops in OpenMP to exploit multicore hardware to increase performance by another factor of 12 to 17. The last four steps leverage our understanding how the underlying hardware really works in a modern microprocessor and collectively only requires 21 lines of C code. Figure 1.20 shows speedup on a log scale of a factor of nearly 50,000 over the original Python version. Instead of waiting almost six hours, it would take less than a second! Elaboration:  To accelerate Python, programmers commonly call highly optimized libraries instead of writing the code in Python itself. Since we are trying to show the inherent speed of Python versus C, we show the matrix multiply speed in Python itself. If we used the Numpy library instead, a 960 x 960 matrix multiply would take much less than 1 second instead of 5 minutes. 1.11 Fallacies and Pitfalls The purpose of a section on fallacies and pitfalls, which will be found in every chapter, is to explain some commonly held misconceptions that you might encounter. We call them fallacies. When discussing a fallacy, we try to give a counterexample. We also discuss pitfalls, or easily made mistakes. Often pitfalls are generalizations of principles that are true in a limited context. The purpose of these sections is to help you avoid making these mistakes in the computers you may design or use. Cost/performance fallacies and pitfalls have ensnared many a computer architect, including us. Accordingly, this 1,365 2,457 3,686 44,226 Python (Ch. 1) translate to C (Ch. 2) + Data Level Parallelism (Ch. 3) + Instruction level parallelism (Ch. 4) + Memory hierarchy optimization (Ch. 5) + Thread level parallelism (Ch. 6) Speed-up FIGURE 1.20  Optimizations of matrix multiply program in Python in the next five chapters of this book.

 1.11  Fallacies and Pitfalls section suffers no shortage of relevant examples. We start with a pitfall that traps many designers and reveals an important relationship in computer design. Pitfall:  Expecting the improvement of one aspect of a computer to increase overall performance by an amount proportional to the size of the improvement. The great idea of making the common case fast has a demoralizing corollary that has plagued designers of both hardware and software. It reminds us that the opportunity for improvement is affected by how much time the event consumes. A simple design problem illustrates it well. Suppose a program runs in 100 seconds on a computer, with multiply operations responsible for 80 seconds of this time. How much do I have to improve the speed of multiplication if I want my program to run five times faster? The execution time of the program after making the improvement is given by the following simple equation known as Amdahl’s Law: Executiontimeafterimprovement Executiontimeaffected by improvement Amount  of improvement Executiontimeunaffected  For this problem: Execution time afer improvement seconds seconds n ( ) Since we want the performance to be five times faster, the new execution time should be 20 seconds, giving seconds seconds seconds seconds    n n That is, there is no amount by which we can enhance-multiply to achieve a fivefold increase in performance, if multiply accounts for only 80% of the workload. The performance enhancement possible with a given improvement is limited by the amount that the improved feature is used. In everyday life this concept also yields what we call the law of diminishing returns. We can use Amdahl’s Law to estimate performance improvements when we know the time consumed for some function and its potential speedup. Amdahl’s Law, together with the CPU performance equation, is a handy tool for evaluating possible enhancements. Amdahl’s Law is explored in more detail in the exercises. Amdahl’s Law is also used to argue for practical limits to the number of parallel processors. We examine this argument in the Fallacies and Pitfalls section of Chapter 6. Fallacy:  Computers at low utilization use little power. Power efficiency matters at low utilizations because server workloads vary. Utilization of servers in Google’s warehouse scale computer, for example, is between 10% and 50% Amdahl’s Law  A rule stating that the performance enhancement possible with a given improvement is limited by the amount that the improved feature is used. It is a quantitative version of the law of diminishing returns.

Chapter 1  Computer Abstractions and Technology most of the time and at 100% less than 1% of the time. Even given 5 years to learn how to run the SPECpower benchmark well, the specially configured computer with the best results in 2020 still uses 33% of the peak power at 10% of the load. Systems in the field that are not configured for the SPECpower benchmark are surely worse. Since servers’ workloads vary but use a large fraction of peak power, Luiz Barroso and Urs Hölzle (2007) argue that we should redesign hardware to achieve “energy-proportional computing.” If future servers used, say, 10% of peak power at 10% workload, we could reduce the electricity bill of datacenters and become good corporate citizens in an era of increasing concern about CO2 emissions. Fallacy:  Designing for performance and designing for energy efficiency are unrelated goals. Since energy is power over time, it is often the case that hardware or software optimizations that take less time save energy overall even if the optimization takes a bit more energy when it is used. One reason is that all the rest of the computer is consuming energy while the program is running, so even if the optimized portion uses a little more energy, the reduced time can save the energy of the whole system. Pitfall:  Using a subset of the performance equation as a performance metric. We have already warned about the danger of predicting performance based on simply one of the clock rate, instruction count, or CPI. Another common mistake is to use only two of the three factors to compare performance. Although using two of the three factors may be valid in a limited context, the concept is also easily misused. Indeed, nearly all proposed alternatives to the use of time as the performance metric have led eventually to misleading claims, distorted results, or incorrect interpretations. One alternative to time is MIPS (million instructions per second). For a given program, MIPS is simply MIPS Instructioncount Execution time  Since MIPS is an instruction execution rate, MIPS specifies performance inversely to execution time; faster computers have a higher MIPS rating. The good news about MIPS is that it is easy to understand, and quicker computers mean bigger MIPS, which matches intuition. There are three problems with using MIPS as a measure for comparing computers. First, MIPS specifies the instruction execution rate but does not take into account the capabilities of the instructions. We cannot compare computers with different instruction sets using MIPS, since the instruction counts will certainly differ. Second, MIPS varies between programs on the same computer; thus, a computer cannot have a single MIPS rating. For example, by substituting for execution time, we see the relationship between MIPS, clock rate, and CPI: MIPS Instructioncount Instructioncount CPI Clockrate Clo     ckrate CPI 106 million instructions per second (MIPS)  A measurement of program execution speed based on the number of millions of instructions. MIPS is computed as the instruction count divided by the product of the execution time and 106.

 1.12  Concluding Remarks Measurement Computer A Computer B Instruction count 10 billion 8 billion Clock rate 4 GHz 4 GHz CPI 1.0 1.1 a. Which computer has the higher MIPS rating? b. Which computer is faster? Where … the ENIAC is equipped with 18,000 vacuum tubes and weighs 30 tons, computers in the future may have 1,000 vacuum tubes and perhaps weigh just 1½ tons. Popular Mechanics, March 1949 Check Yourself The CPI varied by a factor of 4 for SPECspeed 2017 Integer on an Intel Xeon computer in Figure 1.18, so MIPS does as well. Finally, and most importantly, if a new program executes more instructions but each instruction is faster, MIPS can vary independently from performance! Consider the following performance measurements for a program: 1.12 Concluding Remarks Although it is difficult to predict exactly what level of cost/performance computers will have in the future, it’s a safe bet that they will be much better than they are today. To participate in these advances, computer designers and programmers must understand a wider variety of issues. Both hardware and software designers construct computer systems in hierarchical layers, with each lower layer hiding details from the level above. This great idea of abstraction is fundamental to understanding today’s computer systems, but it does not mean that designers can limit themselves to knowing a single abstraction. Perhaps the most important example of abstraction is the interface between hardware and low-level software, called the instruction set architecture. Maintaining the instruction set architecture as a constant enables many implementations of that architecture—presumably varying in cost and performance—to run identical software. On the downside, the architecture may preclude introducing innovations that require the interface to change. There is a reliable method of determining and reporting performance by using the execution time of real programs as the metric. This execution time is related to other important measurements we can make by the following equation: Seconds Program Instructions Program Clock cycles Instruction    Seconds Clock cycle We will use this equation and its constituent factors many times. Remember, though, that individually the factors do not determine performance: only the product, which equals execution time, is a reliable measure of performance.

Chapter 1  Computer Abstractions and Technology The key hardware technology for modern processors is silicon. While silicon fuels the rapid advance of hardware, new ideas in the organization of computers have improved price/performance. Two of the key ideas are exploiting parallelism in the program, normally today via multiple processors, and exploiting locality of accesses to a memory hierarchy, typically via caches. Energy efficiency has replaced die area as the most critical resource of microprocessor design. Conserving power while trying to increase performance has forced the hardware industry to switch to multicore microprocessors, thereby requiring the software industry to switch to programming parallel hardware. Parallelism is now required for performance. Computer designs have always been measured by cost and performance, as well as other important factors such as energy, dependability, cost of ownership, and scalability. Although this chapter has focused on cost, performance, and energy, the best designs will strike the appropriate balance for a given market among all the factors. Road Map for This Book At the bottom of these abstractions is the five classic components of a computer: datapath, control, memory, input, and output (refer to Figure 1.5). These five components also serve as the framework for the rest of the chapters in this book: ■ Datapath: Chapter 3, Chapter 4, Chapter 6, and Appendix B ■ Control: Chapter 4, Chapter 6, and Appendix B ■ Memory: Chapter 5 ■ Input: Chapters 5 and 6 ■ Output: Chapters 5 and 6 As mentioned above, Chapter 4 describes how processors exploit implicit parallelism, Chapter 6 describes the explicitly parallel multicore microprocessors that are at the heart of the parallel revolution, and Appendix B describes the highly parallel graphics processor chip. Chapter 5 describes how a memory hierarchy exploits locality. Chapter 2 describes instruction sets—the interface between compilers and the computer—and emphasizes the role of compilers and programming languages in using the features of the instruction set. Chapter 3 describes how computers handle arithmetic data. Appendix A introduces logic design. Execution time is the only valid and unimpeachable measure of performance. Many other metrics have been proposed and found wanting. Sometimes these metrics are flawed from the start by not reflecting execution time; other times a metric that is sound in a limited context is extended and used beyond that context or without the additional clarification needed to make it valid. The BIG Picture

 1.13  Historical Perspective and Further Reading 54.e1 1.13 Historical Perspective and Further Reading For each chapter in the text, a section devoted to a historical perspective can be found online. We may trace the development of an idea through a series of machines or describe some important projects, and we provide references in case you are interested in probing further. The historical perspective for this chapter provides a background for some of the key ideas presented therein. Its purpose is to give you the human story behind the technological advances and to place achievements in their historical context. By learning the past, you may be better able to understand the forces that will shape computing in the future. Each historical perspective section ends with suggestions for additional reading, which are also collected separately in the online section “Further Reading.” The First Electronic Computers J. Presper Eckert and John Mauchly at the Moore School of the University of Pennsylvania built what is widely accepted to be the world’s first operational electronic, general-purpose computer. This machine, called ENIAC (Electronic Numerical Integrator and Calculator), was funded by the United States Army and started working during World War II but was not publicly disclosed until 1946. ENIAC was a general-purpose machine used for computing artillery-firing tables. Figure e1.13.1 shows the U-shaped computer, which was 80 feet long by 8.5 feet An active field of science is like an immense anthill; the individual almost vanishes into the mass of minds tumbling over each other, carrying information from place to place, passing it around at the speed of light. Lewis Thomas, “Natural Science,” in The Lives of a Cell, 1974 FIGURE e1.13.1  ENIAC, the world’s first general-purpose electronic computer.

54.e2 1.13  Historical Perspective and Further Reading high and several feet wide. Each of the 20 10-digit registers was 2 feet long. In total, ENIAC used 18,000 vacuum tubes. In size, ENIAC was two orders of magnitude bigger than machines built today, yet it was more than eight orders of magnitude slower, performing 1900 additions per second. ENIAC provided conditional jumps and was programmable, clearly distinguishing it from earlier calculators. Programming was done manually by plugging cables and setting switches, and data were entered on punched cards. Programming for typical calculations required from half an hour to a whole day. ENIAC was a general-purpose machine, limited primarily by a small amount of storage and tedious programming. In 1944, John von Neumann was attracted to the ENIAC project. The group wanted to improve the way programs were entered and discussed storing programs as numbers; von Neumann helped crystallize the ideas and wrote a memo proposing a stored-program computer called EDVAC (Electronic Discrete Variable Automatic Computer). Herman Goldstine distributed the memo and put von Neumann’s name on it, much to the dismay of Eckert and Mauchly, whose names were omitted. This memo has served as the basis for the commonly used term von Neumann computer. Several early pioneers in the computer field believe that this term gives too much credit to von Neumann, who wrote up the ideas, and too little to the engineers, Eckert and Mauchly, who worked on the machines. For this reason, the term does not appear elsewhere in this book or in the online sections. In 1946, Maurice Wilkes of Cambridge University visited the Moore School to attend the latter part of a series of lectures on developments in electronic computers. When he returned to Cambridge, Wilkes decided to embark on a project to build a stored-program computer named EDSAC (Electronic Delay Storage Automatic Calculator). EDSAC started working in 1949 and was the world’s first full-scale, operational, stored-program computer [Wilkes, 1985]. (A small prototype called the Mark-I, built at the University of Manchester in 1948, might be called the first operational stored-program machine.) Section 2.5 explains the stored-program concept. In 1947, Eckert and Mauchly applied for a patent on electronic computers. The dean of the Moore School demanded that the patent be turned over to the university, which may have helped Eckert and Mauchly conclude that they should leave. Their departure crippled the EDVAC project, delaying completion until 1952. Goldstine left to join von Neumann at the Institute for Advanced Study (IAS) at Princeton in 1946. Together with Arthur Burks, they issued a report based on the memo written earlier [Burks et al., 1946]. The paper was incredible for the period; reading it today, you would never guess this landmark paper was written more than 70 years ago, because it discusses most of the architectural concepts seen in modern computers. (We quote from that text liberally in Chapter 2.) This paper led to the IAS machine built by Julian Bigelow. It had a total of 1024 40-bit words and was roughly 10 times faster than ENIAC. The group thought about uses for 

 1.13  Historical Perspective and Further Reading 54.e3 the machine, published a set of reports, and encouraged visitors. These reports and visitors inspired the development of a number of new computers. Recently, there has been some controversy about the work of John Atanasoff, who built a small-scale electronic computer in the early 1940s. His machine, designed at Iowa State University, was a special-purpose computer that was never completely operational. Mauchly briefly visited Atanasoff before he built ENIAC. The presence of the Atanasoff machine, together with delays in filing the ENIAC patents (the work was classified and patents could not be filed until after the war) and the distribution of von Neumann’s EDVAC paper, was used to break the Eckert- Mauchly patent. Though controversy still rages over Atanasoff’s role, Eckert and Mauchly are usually given credit for building the first working, general-purpose, electronic computer [Stern, 1980]. Another pioneering computer that deserves credit was a special-purpose machine built by Konrad Zuse in Germany in the late 1930s and early 1940s. Although Zuse had the design for a programmable computer ready, the German government decided not to fund scientific investigations taking more than 2 years because the bureaucrats expected the war would be won by that deadline. Across the English Channel, during World War II, special-purpose electronic computers were built to decrypt intercepted German messages. A team at Bletchley Park, including Alan Turing, built the Colossus in 1943. The machines were kept secret until 1970; after the war, the group had little impact on commercial British computers. While work on ENIAC went forward, Howard Aiken was building an electro- mechanical computer called the Mark-I at Harvard (a name that Manchester later adopted for its machine). He followed the Mark-I with a relay machine, the Mark-II, and a pair of vacuum tube machines, the Mark-III and Mark-IV. In contrast to earlier machines like EDSAC, which used a single memory for instructions and data, the Mark-III and Mark-IV had separate memories for instructions and data. The machines were regarded as reactionary by the advocates of stored-program computers; the term Harvard architecture was coined to describe machines with distinct memories. Paying respect to history, this term is used today in a different sense to describe machines with a single main memory but with separate caches for instructions and data. The Whirlwind project was begun at MIT in 1947 and was aimed at applications in real-time radar signal processing. Although it led to several inventions, its most important innovation was magnetic core memory. Whirlwind had 2048 16-bit words of magnetic core. Magnetic cores served as the main memory technology for nearly 30 years. Commercial Developments In December 1947, Eckert and Mauchly formed Eckert-Mauchly Computer Corporation. Their first machine, the BINAC, was built for Northrop and was shown in August 1949. After some financial difficulties, their firm was acquired by Remington-Rand, where they built the UNIVAC I (Universal Automatic 

54.e4 1.13  Historical Perspective and Further Reading Computer), designed to be sold as a general-purpose computer (Figure e1.13.2). Originally delivered in June 1951, UNIVAC I sold for about $1 million and was the first successful commercial computer—48 systems were built! This early computer, along with many other fascinating pieces of computer lore, may be seen at the Computer History Museum in Mountain View, California. FIGURE e1.13.2  UNIVAC I, the first commercial computer in the United States. It correctly predicted the outcome of the 1952 presidential election, but its initial forecast was withheld from broadcast because experts doubted the use of such early results. IBM had been in the punched card and office automation business but didn’t start building computers until 1950. The first IBM computer, the IBM 701, shipped in 1952, and eventually 19 units were sold. In the early 1950s, many people were pessimistic about the future of computers, believing that the market and opportunities for these “highly specialized” machines were quite limited. In 1964, after investing $5 billion, IBM made a bold move with the announcement of the System/360. An IBM spokesman said the following at the time: We are not at all humble in this announcement. This is the most important product announcement that this corporation has ever made in its history. It’s not a computer in any previous sense. It’s not a product, but a line of products … that spans in performance from the very low part of the computer line to the very high.

 1.13  Historical Perspective and Further Reading 54.e5 Moving the idea of the architecture abstraction into commercial reality, IBM announced six implementations of the System/360 architecture that varied in price and performance by a factor of 25. Figure e1.13.3 shows four of these models. IBM bet its company on the success of a computer family, and IBM won. The System/360 and its successors dominated the large computer market. Its descendants are still at $10 billion annual business for IBM, making the IBM System/360 the oldest surviving instruction set architecture. Fred Brooks, Jr., won the 1999 ACM A. M. Turing Award in part for leading the IBM System/360 Project. About a year later, Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) unveiled the PDP-8, the first commercial minicomputer, in 1965. This small machine was a breakthrough in low-cost design, allowing DEC to offer a computer for under $20,000. Minicomputers were the forerunners of microprocessors, with Intel inventing the first microprocessor in 1971—the Intel 4004. FIGURE e1.13.3  IBM System/360 computers: models 40, 50, 65, and 75 were all introduced in 1964. These four models varied in cost and performance by a factor of almost 10; it grows to 25 if we include models 20 and 30 (not shown). The clock rate, range of memory sizes, and approximate price for only the processor and memory of average size: (a) model 40, 1.6 MHz, 32 KB–256 KB, $225,000; (b) model 50, 2.0 MHz, 128 KB–256 KB, $550,000; (c) model 65, 5.0 MHz, 256 KB–1 MB, $1,200,000; and (d) model 75, 5.1 MHz, 256 KB–1 MB, $1,900,000. Adding I/O devices typically increased the price by factors of 1.8 to 3.5, with higher factors for cheaper models.

54.e6 1.13  Historical Perspective and Further Reading In 1963 came the announcement of the first supercomputer. This announcement came neither from the large companies nor even from the high-tech centers. Seymour Cray led the design of the Control Data Corporation CDC 6600 in Minnesota. This machine included many ideas that are beginning to be found in the latest microprocessors. Cray later left CDC to form Cray Research, Inc., in Wisconsin. In 1976, he announced the Cray-1 (Figure e1.13.4). This machine was simultaneously the fastest in the world, the most expensive, and the computer with the best cost/performance for scientific programs. The Cray-1 would be on any list of the greatest computers of all time, although the total lifetime sales was a little over 80 supercomputer. FIGURE e1.13.4  Cray-1, the first commercial vector supercomputer, announced in 1976. This machine had the unusual distinction of being both the fastest computer for scientific applications and the computer with the best price/performance for those applications. Viewed from the top, the computer looks like the letter C. Seymour Cray passed away in 1996 because of injuries sustained in an automobile accident. At the time of his death, this 70-year-old computer pioneer was working on his vision of the next generation of supercomputers. (See www.cray.com for more details.) While Seymour Cray was creating the world’s most expensive computer, other designers around the world were looking at using the microprocessor to create a computer so cheap that you could have it at home. There is no single fountainhead for the personal computer, but in 1977, the Apple IIe (Figure e1.13.5) from Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak set standards for low cost, high volume, and high reliability that defined the personal computer industry. Between 1977 and 1993, Apple produced about six million of these computers.

 1.13  Historical Perspective and Further Reading 54.e7 However, even with a 4-year head start, Apple’s personal computers finished second in popularity. The IBM Personal Computer, announced in 1981, became the best-selling computer of any kind; its success gave Intel the most popular microprocessor and Microsoft the most popular operating system. In the next decade, the most popular CD was the Microsoft operating system, even though it costs many times more than a music CD! Of course, over the more than 30 years that the IBM-compatible personal computer has existed, it has evolved greatly. In fact, the first personal computers had 16-bit processors and 64 kilobytes of memory, and a low-density, slow floppy disk was the only nonvolatile storage! Floppy disks were originally developed by IBM for loading diagnostic programs in mainframes, but were a major I/O device in personal computers for almost 20 years before the advent of CDs and networking made them obsolete as a method for exchanging data. Naturally, Intel microprocessors have also evolved since the first PC, which used a 16-bit processor with an 8-bit external interface! In Chapter 2, we write about the evolution of the Intel architecture. The first personal computers were quite simple, with little or no graphics capability, no pointing devices, and primitive operating systems compared to those of today. The computer that inspired many of the architectural and software concepts that characterize the modern desktop machines was the Xerox Alto, shown in Figure e1.13.6. The Alto was created as an experimental prototype of a future computer; there were several hundred Altos built, including a significant FIGURE e1.13.5  The Apple IIc Plus. Designed by Steve Wozniak, the Apple IIc set standards of cost and reliability for the industry.

54.e8 1.13  Historical Perspective and Further Reading FIGURE e1.13.6  The Xerox Alto was the primary inspiration for the modern desktop computer. It included a mouse, a bit-mapped scheme, a Windows-based user interface, and a local network connection. number that were donated to universities. Among the technologies incorporated in the Alto were: ■ a bit-mapped graphics display integrated with a computer (earlier graphics displays acted as terminals, usually connected to larger computers) ■ a mouse, which was invented earlier, but included on every Alto and used extensively in the user interface ■ a local area network (LAN), which became the precursor to the Ethernet ■ a user interface based on Windows and featuring a WYSIWYG (what you see is what you get) editor and interactive drawing programs

 1.13  Historical Perspective and Further Reading 54.e9 In addition, both file servers and print servers were developed and interfaced via the local area network, and connections between the local area network and the wide area ARPAnet produced the first versions of Internet-style networking. The Xerox Alto was incredibly influential and clearly affected the design of a wide variety of computers and software systems, including the Apple Macintosh, the IBM-compatible PC, MacOS and Windows, and Sun and other early workstations. Like the Cray-1, the Alto would be on any list of the greatest computers of all time, despite its total production being only about 2000. Chuck Thacker won the 2009 ACM A. M. Turing Award primarily for creating the Alto. Measuring Performance From the earliest days of computing, designers have specified performance goals— ENIAC was to be 1000 times faster than the Harvard Mark-I, and the IBM Stretch (7030) was to be 100 times faster than the fastest computer then in existence. What wasn’t clear, though, was how this performance was to be measured. The original measure of performance was the time required to perform an individual operation, such as addition. Since most instructions took the same execution time, the timing of one was the same as the others. As the execution times of instructions in a computer became more diverse, however, the time required for one operation was no longer useful for comparisons. To consider these differences, an instruction mix was calculated by measuring the relative frequency of instructions in a computer across many programs. Multiplying the time for each instruction by its weight in the mix gave the user the average instruction execution time. (If measured in clock cycles, average instruction execution time is the same as average CPI.) Since instruction sets were similar, this was a more precise comparison than add times. From average instruction execution time, then, it was only a small step to MIPS. MIPS had the virtue of being easy to understand; hence, it grew in popularity. The Quest for an Average Program As processors were becoming more sophisticated and relied on memory hierarchies (the topic of Chapter 5) and pipelining (the topic of Chapter 4), a single execution time for each instruction no longer existed; neither execution time nor MIPS, therefore, could be calculated from the instruction mix and the manual. Although it might seem obvious today that the right thing to do would have been to develop a set of real applications that could be used as standard benchmarks, this was a difficult task until the late 1980s. Variations in operating systems and language standards made it hard to create large programs that could be moved from computer to computer simply by recompiling. Instead, the next step was benchmarking using synthetic programs. The Whetstone synthetic program was created by measuring scientific programs written in Algol-60 (see Curnow and Wichmann’s [1976] description). This 

54.e10 1.13  Historical Perspective and Further Reading program was converted to Fortran and was widely used to characterize scientific program performance. Whetstone performance is typically quoted in Whetstones per second—the number of executions of a single iteration of the Whetstone benchmark! Dhrystone is another synthetic benchmark that is still used in some embedded computing circles (see Weicker’s [1984] description and methodology). About the same time Whetstone was developed, the concept of kernel benchmarks gained popularity. Kernels are small, time-intensive pieces from real programs that are extracted and then used as benchmarks. This approach was developed primarily for benchmarking high-end computers, especially supercomputers. Livermore Loops and Linpack are the best-known examples. The Livermore Loops consist of a series of 21 small loop fragments. Linpack consists of a portion of a linear algebra subroutine package. Kernels are best used to isolate the performance of individual features of a computer and to explain the reasons for differences in the performance of real programs. Because scientific applications often use small pieces of code that execute for a long time, characterizing performance with kernels is most popular in this application class. Although kernels help illuminate performance, they frequently overstate the performance on real applications. SPECulating about Performance An important advance in performance evaluation was the formation of the System Performance Evaluation Cooperative (SPEC) group in 1988. SPEC comprises representatives of many computer companies—the founders being Apollo/ Hewlett-Packard, DEC, MIPS, and Sun—who have agreed on a set of real programs and inputs that all will run. It is worth noting that SPEC couldn’t have come into being before portable operating systems and the popularity of high-level languages. Now compilers, too, are accepted as a proper part of the performance of computer systems and must be measured in any evaluation. History teaches us that while the SPEC effort may be useful with current computers, it will not meet the needs of the next generation without changing. In 1991, a throughput measure was added, based on running multiple versions of the benchmark. It is most useful for evaluating timeshared usage of a uniprocessor or a multiprocessor. Other system benchmarks that include OS-intensive and I/O-intensive activities have also been added. Another change was the decision to drop some benchmarks and add others. One result of the difficulty in finding benchmarks was that the initial version of the SPEC benchmarks (called SPEC89) contained six floating-point benchmarks but only four integer benchmarks. Calculating a single summary measurement using the geometric mean of execution times normalized to a VAX-11/780 meant that this measure favored computers with strong floating-point performance.

 1.13  Historical Perspective and Further Reading 54.e11 In 1992, a new benchmark set (called SPEC92) was introduced. It incorporated additional benchmarks, dropped matrix300, and provided separate means (SPEC INT and SPECFP) for integer and floating-point programs. In addition, the SPECbase measure, which disallows program-specific optimization flags, was added to provide users with a performance measurement that would more closely match what they might experience on their own programs. The SPECFP numbers show the largest increase versus the base SPECFP measurement, typically ranging from 15% to 30% higher. In 1995, the benchmark set was once again updated, adding some new integer and floating-point benchmarks, as well as removing some benchmarks that suffered from flaws or had running times that had become too small given the factor of 20 or more performance improvement since the first SPEC release. SPEC95 also changed the base computer for normalization to a Sun SPARC Station 10/40, since operating versions of the original base computer were becoming difficult to find! The most recent version of SPEC is SPEC2017. SPEC CPU needed 82 programs over its six generations, with 47 (57%) used just one generation and only 6 (7%) lasting three or more. The sole survivor from SPEC89 is the gcc compiler. SPEC has also added benchmark suites beyond the original suites targeted at CPU performance. In 2008, SPEC provided benchmark sets for graphics, high- performance scientific computing, object-oriented computing, file systems, Web servers and clients, Java, engineering CAD applications, and power. The Growth of Embedded Computing Embedded processors have been around for a very long time; in fact, the first minicomputers and the first microprocessors were originally developed for controlling functions in a laboratory or industrial application. For many years, the dominant use of embedded processors was for industrial control applications, and although this use continued to grow, the processors tended to be very cheap and the performance relatively low. For example, the best-selling processor in the world remains an 8-bit micro controller used in cars, some home appliances, and other simple applications. The late 1980s and early 1990s saw the emergence of new opportunities for embedded processors, ranging from more advanced video games and set-top boxes to cell phones and personal digital assistants. The rapidly increasing number of information appliances and the growth of networking have driven dramatic surges in the number of embedded processors, as well as the performance requirements. To evaluate performance, the embedded community was inspired by SPEC to create the Embedded Microprocessor Benchmark Consortium (EEMBC). Started in 1997, it consists of a collection of kernels organized into suites that address different portions of the embedded industry. They announced the second generation of these benchmarks in 2007. In 2019, a consortium of academics and practitioners developed a suite of free programs called Embench with the explicit goal of replacing widespread use of synthetic programs like Dhrystone and CoreMarks as benchmarks for embedded computing.

54.e12 1.13  Historical Perspective and Further Reading Year Name Size (cu. ft.) Power (watts) Performance (adds/sec) Memory (KB) Price Price/ performance vs. UNIVAC Adjusted price (2007 $) Adjusted price/ performance vs. UNIVAC UNIVAC I 125,000 $1,000,000 0,000,001 $7,670,724 00,000,001 IBM S/360 model 50 10,000 500,000 $1,000,000 0,000,263 $6,018,798 00,000,319 PDP-8 330,000 0,0$16,000 0,010,855 0,0$94,685 00,013,367 Cray-1 60,000 166,000,000 32,000 $4,000,000 0,021,842 $13,509,798 00,047,127 IBM PC 000,150 240,000 0,00 $3000 0,042,105 0,00 $6859 00,134,208 HP 9000/ model 750 000,500 50,000,000 16,384 0,00 $7400 3,556,188 0,00$11,807 16,241,889 Intel PPro PC (200 MHz) 000,500 400,000,000 16,384 0,00 $4400 47,846,890 $6211 247,021,234 Intel Pentium 4 PC (3.0 GHz) 6,000,000,000 262,144 $1600 1,875,000,000 $2009 11,451,750,000 AMD Barcelona PC (2.5 GHz) 20,000,000,000 2,097,152 $800 12,500,000,000 $800 95,884,051,042 FIGURE e1.13.7  Characteristics of key commercial computers since 1950, in actual dollars and in 2007 dollars adjusted for inflation. The last row assumes we can fully utilize the potential performance of the four cores in Barcelona. In contrast to Figure e1.13.3, here the price of the IBM S/360 model 50 includes I/O devices. (Source: The Computer History Museum and Producer Price Index for Industrial Commodities.) A Half-Century of Progress Since 1951, there have been thousands of new computers using a wide range of technologies and having widely varying capabilities. Figure e1.13.7 summarizes the key characteristics of some machines mentioned in this section and shows the dramatic changes that have occurred in just over 50 years. After adjusting for inflation, price/performance has improved by almost 100 billion in 55 years, or about 58% per year. Another way to say it is we’ve seen a factor of 10,000 improvement in cost and a factor of 10,000,000 improvement in performance. Readers interested in computer history should consult Annals of the History of Computing, a journal devoted to the history of computing. Several books describing the early days of computing have also appeared, many written by the pioneers including Goldstine [1972], Metropolis et al. [1980], and Wilkes [1985].

 1.13  Historical Perspective and Further Reading 54.e13 Further Reading Barroso, L. and U. Hölzle [2007]. “The case for energy-proportional computing”, IEEE Computer December. A plea to change the nature of computer components so that they use much less power when lightly utilized. Bell, C. G. [1996]. Computer Pioneers and Pioneer Computers, ACM and the Computer Museum, videotapes. Two videotapes on the history of computing, produced by Gordon and Gwen Bell, including the following machines and their inventors: Harvard Mark-I, ENIAC, EDSAC, IAS machine, and many others. Burks, A. W., H. H. Goldstine, and J. von Neumann [1946]. “Preliminary discussion of the logical design of an electronic computing instrument,” Report to the U.S. Army Ordnance Department, p. 1; also appears in Papers of John von Neumann, W. Aspray and A. Burks (Eds.), MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, and Tomash Publishers, Los Angeles, 1987, 97–146. A classic paper explaining computer hardware and software before the first stored-program computer was built. We quote extensively from it in Chapter 3. It simultaneously explained computers to the world and was a source of controversy because the first draft did not give credit to Eckert and Mauchly. Campbell-Kelly, M. and W. Aspray [1996]. Computer: A History of the Information Machine, Basic Books, New York. Two historians chronicle the dramatic story. The New York Times calls it well written and authoritative. Ceruzzi, P. F. [1998]. A History of Modern Computing, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. Contains a good description of the later history of computing: the integrated circuit and its impact, personal computers, UNIX, and the Internet. Curnow, H. J. and B. A. Wichmann [1976]. “A synthetic benchmark”, The Computer J. 19(1):80. Describes the first major synthetic benchmark, Whetstone, and how it was created. Flemming, P. J. and J. J. Wallace [1986]. “How not to lie with statistics: The correct way to summarize benchmark results”, Comm. ACM 29:3 (March), 218–21. Describes some of the underlying principles in using different means to summarize performance results. Goldstine, H. H. [1972]. The Computer: From Pascal to von Neumann, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ. A personal view of computing by one of the pioneers who worked with von Neumann. Hayes, B. [2007]. “Computing in a parallel universe”, American Scientist Vol. 95(November– December):476–480. An overview of the parallel computing challenge written for the layman. Hennessy, J. L. and D. A. Patterson [2019]. Chapter 1 of Computer Architecture: A Quantitative Approach, sixth edition, Morgan Kaufmann, Cambridge, MA. Section 1.5 goes into more detail on power, Section 1.6 contains much more detail on the cost of integrated circuits and explains the reasons for the difference between price and cost, and Section 1.8 gives more details on evaluating performance. Lampson, B. W. [1986]. “Personal distributed computing; The Alto and Ethernet software.” In ACM Conference on the History of Personal Workstations (January).

54.e14 1.13  Historical Perspective and Further Reading Thacker, C. R. [1986]. “Personal distributed computing: The Alto and Ethernet hardware,” In ACM Conference on the History of Personal Workstations (January). These two papers describe the software and hardware of the landmark Alto. Metropolis, N., J. Howlett, and G.-C. Rota (Eds.) [1980]. A History of Computing in the Twentieth Century, Academic Press, New York. A collection of essays that describe the people, software, computers, and laboratories involved in the first experimental and commercial computers. Most of the authors were personally involved in the projects. An excellent bibliography of early reports concludes this interesting book. Public Broadcasting System [1992]. The Machine That Changed the World, videotapes. These five 1-hour programs include rare footage and interviews with pioneers of the computer industry. Slater, R. [1987]. Portraits in Silicon, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. Short biographies of 31 computer pioneers. Stern, N. [1980]. “Who invented the first electronic digital computer?” Annals of the History of Computing 2:4 (October), 375–76. A historian’s perspective on Atanasoff versus Eckert and Mauchly. Weicker, R. P. [1984]. “Dhrystone: a synthetic systems programming benchmark”, Communications of the ACM 27(10):1013–1030. Description of a synthetic benchmarking program for systems code. Wilkes, M. V. [1985]. Memoirs of a Computer Pioneer, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. A personal view of computing by one of the pioneers.

 1.14  Self-Study An active field of science is like an immense anthill; the individual almost vanishes into the mass of minds tumbling over each other, carrying information from place to place, passing it around at the speed of light. Lewis Thomas, “Natural Science,” in The Lives of a Cell, 1974 1.13 Historical Perspective and Further Reading For each chapter in the text, a section devoted to a historical perspective can be found online on a site that accompanies this book. We may trace the development of an idea through a series of computers or describe some important projects, and we provide references in case you are interested in probing further. The historical perspective for this chapter provides a background for some of the key ideas presented in this opening chapter. Its purpose is to give you the human story behind the technological advances and to place achievements in their historical context. By studying the past, you may be better able to understand the forces that will shape computing in the future. Each Historical Perspective section online ends with suggestions for further reading, which are also collected separately online under the section “Further Reading.” The rest of Section 1.13 is found online. 1.14 Self-Study Starting with the sixth edition, we are adding a section in every chapter with some hopefully thought-provoking exercises along with their solutions to help readers check whether they are following the material. Mapping great ideas in architecture to the real world. Find the best match of the seven great ideas from computer architecture to these real-world examples: a. Reducing time to do laundry by washing the next load while drying the last load b. Hiding a spare key in case you lose your front door key c. Checking the weather forecast for cities you would drive through when deciding which route to take on a long winter trip d. Express checkout lanes in grocery stores for 10 items or less e. The local branch of a large city library system. f. automobile powered by an electric motor on all four wheels g. optional self-driving automobile mode that requires the purchase of self- parking and navigation options How do you measure fastest? Consider the three different processors P1, P2, and P3 executing the same instruction set. P1 has a clock cycle time of 0.33 ns and CPI of 1.5; P2 has a clock cycle time of 0.40 ns and CPI of 1.0; P3 has a clock cycle time of 0.25 ns and CPI of 2.2. a. Which has the highest clock rate? What is it?

Chapter 1  Computer Abstractions and Technology b. Which is the fastest computer? If the answer is different than above, explain why. Which is slowest? c. How do the answers for a and b reflect the importance of benchmarks? Amdahl’s law and brotherhood. Amdahl’s law is basically the law of diminishing returns, which applies to investments as well as computer architecture. Your brother has joined a startup and is trying to convince you to invest some of your savings, since he claims, “It’s a sure thing!” a. You decide to invest 10% of your savings. What must your return on investment (i.e, multiple of your investment) in the startup be to double your overall wealth, assuming the startup is your only investment? b. Assuming the startup investment delivers the return you calculated in a, and assuming that your wealth is the same as before the calculation in a, how much of your savings would you need to invest to realize a return (i.e., investment multiple) on your overall wealth equal to 90% of the startup’s increase? How about 95%? c. How do the results relate to Amdahl’s observation about computers? What does it say about brotherhood? $1 $10 $100 $1,000 $10,000 $1,00,000 $10,00,000 $1,00,00,000 $10,00,00,000 DRAM Memory Price ($/Gigabyte) Price of DRAM Memory over Time FIGURE 1.21  Price of memory per gigabyte between 1975 and 2020. (Source: https://jcmit.net/ memoryprice.htm)

 1.14  Self-Study DRAM price versus cost. Figure 1.21 plots the price of DRAM chips from 1975 to 2020, while Figure 1.11 shows capacity per DRAM chip over the same period. It shows a millionfold increase in capacity (16 Kbit to 16 Gbit) and 25-millionfold reduction in price per gigabyte ($100M to $4). Note that the price per GiB fluctuates over time, while capacity per chip has a smooth growth curve. a. Can you see evidence of the slowing of Moore’s law in Figure 1.21? b. Why might the price improve by a factor of 25 times more than the improvement in capacity per chip? What are reasons besides increased chip capacity? c. Why do you think price per gigabyte fluctuates over 3- to 5-year periods? Is it related to the chip cost formulas on page 28 or to other forces in the marketplace? Answers to Self-Study Mapping Great Ideas in Architecture to the Real World a. Performance via Pipelining b. Dependability via Redundancy (although you could argue it is also a use of Performance via Parallelism) c. Performance via Prediction d. Make the Common Case Fast e. Hierarchy of memories f. Performance via Parallelism (although you could argue it is also a use of Dependability via Redundancy) g. Use Abstraction to Simplify Design Fastest Computer a. The clock rates are the inverse of the clock cycle time. P1 = 1/(0.33x10-9 seconds) = 3 GHz; P2 = 1/(0.40x10-9 seconds) = 2.5 GHz; P3 = 1/(0.25x10-9 seconds) = 4 GHz. P3 has the highest clock rate. b. Since all have the same instruction set architecture, all programs have the same instruction count, so we can measure performance as the product of average clock cycles per instruction (CPI) times clock cycle time, which is also the average time of an instruction: ■ P1 = 1.5 x 0.33 ns = 0.495 ns (you could also calculate average instruction time using CPI/clock rate, or 1.5/3.0GHz = 0.495 ns)

Chapter 1  Computer Abstractions and Technology ■ P2 = 1.0 x 0.40 ns = 0.400 ns (or 1.0/2.5GHz = 0.400 ns) ■ P3 = 2.2 x 0.25 ns = 0.550 ns (or 1.0/4.0GHz = 0.550 ns) P2 is fastest and P3 is slowest. Despite having the highest clock rate, on average P3 takes so many more clock cycles that it loses the benefit of a higher clock rate. c. The CPI calculation was based on running some benchmarks. If they are representative of real workloads, the answers to these questions are correct. If the benchmarks are unrealistic, they may not be. The difference between things that are easy to advertise, like clock rate, and actual performance highlights the importance of developing good benchmarks. Brotherhood and Amdahl’s Law a. 11x return on investment to double your savings: 90%∗1 + 10%∗11 = 2.0. b. You must invest 89% of your wealth to get 90% of the full return: 90% of 11x = 9.9x and 11%∗1 + 89%∗11 = 9.9. You must invest 94.5% of wealth to get 95% of the return: 95% of 11x = 10.45x and 5.5%∗1 + 94.5%∗11 =10.45. c. Just as the part you do not invest limits the return on investment even for the high returns of a successful startup, the part of the computer that you do not accelerate limits the benefits of acceleration no matter how much faster you make that improved piece. The amount you invest will be influenced by your faith in your brother’s judgment, especially since 90% of startups do not succeed! Price versus Cost of Memory a. Although the prices fluctuate, it looks like pricing is flatter beginning in 2013, which is consistent with the slowing of Moore’s law. For example, DRAM was $4/GB in 2013 and 2016 as well as 2019. There is no other such long period as flat in the past. b. Neither figure mentions the volume of DRAM chips, which can explain why price improves more than capacity per chip. There are typically manufacturing learning curves where every factor-of-ten increase in volume can result in, say, a factor-of-two cost reduction. There are also innovations in chip packaging that can lower costs and thus prices over a long period. c. DRAMs are commodity parts, as there are multiple companies manufacturing similar products, and thus they are subject to market pressures and fluctuating prices. Prices go up when demand exceeds supply and vice versa. The industry has a history of periods where DRAMs are very profitable, so they build more manufacturing lines until there is an oversupply and prices drop, and they then cut back new manufacturing lines.

 1.15  Exercises 1.15 Exercises The relative time ratings of exercises are shown in square brackets after each exercise number. On average, an exercise rated [10] will take you twice as long as one rated [5]. Sections of the text that should be read before attempting an exercise will be given in angled brackets; for example, <§1.4> means you should have read Section 1.4, Under the Covers, to help you solve this exercise. 1.1  [2] <§1.1> List and describe three types of computers. 1.2  [5] <§1.2> The seven great ideas in computer architecture are similar to ideas from other fields. Match the seven ideas from computer architecture, “Use Abstraction to Simplify Design,” “Make the Common Case Fast,” “Performance via Parallelism,” “Performance via Pipelining,” “Performance via Prediction” “Hierarchy of Memories,” and “Dependability via Redundancy” to the following ideas from other fields: a.  Assembly lines in automobile manufacturing b.  Suspension bridge cables c.  Aircraft and marine navigation systems that incorporate wind information d.  Express elevators in buildings e.  Library reserve desk f.  Increasing the gate area on a CMOS transistor to decrease its switching time g.  Building self-driving cars whose control systems partially rely on existing sensor systems already installed into the base vehicle, such as lane departure systems and smart cruise control systems 1.3  [2] <§1.3> Describe the steps that transform a program written in a high-level language such as C into a representation that is directly executed by a computer processor. 1.4  [2] <§1.4> Assume a color display using 8 bits for each of the primary colors (red, green, blue) per pixel and a frame size of 1280 × 1024. a.  What is the minimum size in bytes of the frame buffer to store a frame? b.  How long would it take, at a minimum, for the frame to be sent over a 100 Mbit/s network?

Chapter 1  Computer Abstractions and Technology 1.5 [5] Consider the table below, which tracks several performance indicators for Intel desktop processors since 2010. The “Tech” column shows the minimum feature size of each processor’s fabrication process. Assume that die size has remained relatively constant, and the number of transistors comprised in each processor scales at (1/t)2, where t = the minimum feature size. For each performance indicator, calculate the average rate of improvement from 2010 to 2019 as well as the number of years required to double each at that corresponding rate. 1.6  [4] <§1.6> Consider three different processors P1, P2, and P3 executing the same instruction set. P1 has a 3 GHz clock rate and a CPI of 1.5. P2 has a 2.5 GHz clock rate and a CPI of 1.0. P3 has a 4.0 GHz clock rate and has a CPI of 2.2. a.  Which processor has the highest performance expressed in instructions per second? b.  If the processors each execute a program in 10 seconds, find the number of cycles and the number of instructions. c.  We are trying to reduce the execution time by 30%, but this leads to an increase of 20% in the CPI. What clock rate should we have to get this time reduction? Desktop processor Year Tech Max. clock speed (GHz) Integer IPC/ core Cores Max. DRAM Bandwidth (GB/s) SP ﬂ oating point (Gﬂ op/s) L3 cache (MiB) Westmere 3.33 17.1 i7-620 Ivy Bridge 3.90 25.6 i7-3770K Broadwell 4.20 34.1 i7-6700K Kaby Lake 4.50 38.4 i7-7700K Coffee Lake 4.90 42.7 i7-9700K Imp./year __% __% __% __% __% __% __% Doubles every __years __years __years __years __years __years __years 

 1.15  Exercises 1.7  [20] <§1.6> Consider two different implementations of the same instruction set architecture. The instructions can be divided into four classes according to their CPI (classes A, B, C, and D). P1 with a clock rate of 2.5 GHz and CPIs of 1, 2, 3, and 3, and P2 with a clock rate of 3 GHz and CPIs of 2, 2, 2, and 2. Given a program with a dynamic instruction count of 1.0E6 instructions divided into classes as follows: 10% class A, 20% class B, 50% class C, and 20% class D, which is faster: P1 or P2? a.  What is the global CPI for each implementation? b.  Find the clock cycles required in both cases. 1.8  [15] <§1.6> Compilers can have a profound impact on the performance of an application. Assume that for a program, compiler A results in a dynamic instruction count of 1.0E9 and has an execution time of 1.1 s, while compiler B results in a dynamic instruction count of 1.2E9 and an execution time of 1.5 s. a.  Find the average CPI for each program given that the processor has a clock cycle time of 1 ns. b.  Assume the compiled programs run on two different processors. If the execution times on the two processors are the same, how much faster is the clock of the processor running compiler A’s code versus the clock of the processor running compiler B’s code? c.  A new compiler is developed that uses only 6.0E8 instructions and has an average CPI of 1.1. What is the speedup of using this new compiler versus using compiler A or B on the original processor? 1.9  The Pentium 4 Prescott processor, released in 2004, had a clock rate of 3.6 GHz and voltage of 1.25 V. Assume that, on average, it consumed 10 W of static power and 90 W of dynamic power. The Core i5 Ivy Bridge, released in 2012, has a clock rate of 3.4 GHz and voltage of 0.9 V. Assume that, on average, it consumed 30 W of static power and 40 W of dynamic power. 1.9.1  [5] < §1.7> For each processor find the average capacitive loads. 1.9.2  [5] < §1.7> Find the percentage of the total dissipated power comprised by static power and the ratio of static power to dynamic power for each technology. 1.9.3  [15] < §1.7> If the total dissipated power is to be reduced by 10%, how much should the voltage be reduced to maintain the same leakage current? Note: power is defined as the product of voltage and current.

Chapter 1  Computer Abstractions and Technology 1.10  Assume for arithmetic, load/store, and branch instructions, a processor has CPIs of 1, 12, and 5, respectively. Also assume that on a single processor a program requires the execution of 2.56E9 arithmetic instructions, 1.28E9 load/store instructions, and 256 million branch instructions. Assume that each processor has a 2 GHz clock frequency. Assume that, as the program is parallelized to run over multiple cores, the number of arithmetic and load/store instructions per processor is divided by 0.7 × p (where p is the number of processors) but the number of branch instructions per processor remains the same. 1.10.1  [5] < §1.7> Find the total execution time for this program on 1, 2, 4, and 8 processors, and show the relative speedup of the 2, 4, and 8 processors result relative to the single processor result. 1.10.2  [10] <§§1.6, 1.8> If the CPI of the arithmetic instructions was doubled, what would the impact be on the execution time of the program on 1, 2, 4, or 8 processors? 1.10.3  [10] <§§1.6, 1.8> To what should the CPI of load/store instructions be reduced in order for a single processor to match the performance of four processors using the original CPI values? 1.11  Assume a 15 cm diameter wafer has a cost of 12, contains 84 dies, and has 0.020 defects/cm2. Assume a 20 cm diameter wafer has a cost of 15, contains 100 dies, and has 0.031 defects/cm2. 1.11.1 [10] <§1.5> Find the yield for both wafers. 1.11.2 [5] <§1.5> Find the cost per die for both wafers. 1.11.3 [5] <§1.5> If the number of dies per wafer is increased by 10% and the defects per area unit increases by 15%, find the die area and yield. 1.11.4 [5] <§1.5> Assume a fabrication process improves the yield from 0.92 to 0.95. Find the defects per area unit for each version of the technology given a die area of 200 mm2. 1.12  The results of the SPEC CPU2006 bzip2 benchmark running on an AMD Barcelona has an instruction count of 2.389E12, an execution time of 750 s, and a reference time of 9650 s. 1.12.1  [5] <§§1.6, 1.9> Find the CPI if the clock cycle time is 0.333 ns. 1.12.2  [5] <§1.9> Find the SPECratio. 1.12.3  [5] <§§1.6, 1.9> Find the increase in CPU time if the number of instructions of the benchmark is increased by 10% without affecting the CPI.

 1.15  Exercises 1.12.4  [5] <§§1.6, 1.9> Find the increase in CPU time if the number of instructions of the benchmark is increased by 10% and the CPI is increased by 5%. 1.12.5  [5] <§§1.6, 1.9> Find the change in the SPECratio for this change. 1.12.6  [10] <§1.6> Suppose that we are developing a new version of the AMD Barcelona processor with a 4 GHz clock rate. We have added some additional instructions to the instruction set in such a way that the number of instructions has been reduced by 15%. The execution time is reduced to 700 s and the new SPECratio is 13.7. Find the new CPI. 1.12.7  [10] <§1.6> This CPI value is larger than obtained in 1.11.1 as the clock rate was increased from 3 GHz to 4 GHz. Determine whether the increase in the CPI is similar to that of the clock rate. If they are dissimilar, why? 1.12.8  [5] <§1.6> By how much has the CPU time been reduced? 1.12.9  [10] <§1.6> For a second benchmark, libquantum, assume an execution time of 960 ns, CPI of 1.61, and clock rate of 3 GHz. If the execution time is reduced by an additional 10% without affecting the CPI and with a clock rate of 4 GHz, determine the number of instructions. 1.12.10  [10] <§1.6> Determine the clock rate required to give a further 10% reduction in CPU time while maintaining the number of instructions and with the CPI unchanged. 1.12.11  [10] <§1.6> Determine the clock rate if the CPI is reduced by 15% and the CPU time by 20% while the number of instructions is unchanged. 1.13  Section 1.11 cites as a pitfall the utilization of a subset of the performance equation as a performance metric. To illustrate this, consider the following two processors. P1 has a clock rate of 4 GHz, average CPI of 0.9, and requires the execution of 5.0E9 instructions. P2 has a clock rate of 3 GHz, an average CPI of 0.75, and requires the execution of 1.0E9 instructions. 1.13.1  [5] <§§1.6, 1.11> One usual fallacy is to consider the computer with the largest clock rate as having the highest performance. Check if this is true for P1 and P2. 1.13.2  [10] <§§1.6, 1.11> Another fallacy is to consider that the processor executing the largest number of instructions will need a larger CPU time. Considering that processor P1 is executing a sequence of 1.0E9 instructions and that the CPI of processors P1 and P2 do not change, determine the number of instructions that P2 can execute in the same time that P1 needs to execute 1.0E9 instructions. 1.13.3  [10] <§§1.6, 1.11> A common fallacy is to use MIPS (millions of instructions per second) to compare the performance of two different processors, and consider that the processor with the largest MIPS has the largest performance. Check if this is true for P1 and P2.

Chapter 1  Computer Abstractions and Technology 1.13.4  [10] <§1.11> Another common performance figure is MFLOPS (millions of floating-point operations per second), defined as MFLOPS No FPoperations executiontime 1E6   . /( ) but this figure has the same problems as MIPS. Assume that 40% of the instructions executed on both P1 and P2 are floating-point instructions. Find the MFLOPS figures for the processors. 1.14  Another pitfall cited in Section 1.11 is expecting to improve the overall performance of a computer by improving only one aspect of the computer. Consider a computer running a program that requires 250 s, with 70 s spent executing FP instructions, 85 s executed L/S instructions, and 40 s spent executing branch instructions. 1.14.1  [5] <§1.11> By how much is the total time reduced if the time for FP operations is reduced by 20%? 1.14.2  [5] <§1.11> By how much is the time for INT operations reduced if the total time is reduced by 20%? 1.14.3  [5] <§1.11> Can the total time can be reduced by 20% by reducing only the time for branch instructions? 1.15  Assume a program requires the execution of 50 × 106 FP instructions, 110 × 106 INT instructions, 80 × 106 L/S instructions, and 16 × 106 branch instructions. The CPI for each type of instruction is 1, 1, 4, and 2, respectively. Assume that the processor has a 2 GHz clock rate. 1.15.1  [10] <§1.11> By how much must we improve the CPI of FP instructions if we want the program to run two times faster? 1.15.2  [10] <§1.11> By how much must we improve the CPI of L/S instructions if we want the program to run two times faster? 1.15.3  [5] <§1.11> By how much is the execution time of the program improved if the CPI of INT and FP instructions is reduced by 40% and the CPI of L/S and Branch is reduced by 30%? 1.16  [5] <§1.8> When a program is adapted to run on multiple processors in a multiprocessor system, the execution time on each processor is comprised of computing time and the overhead time required for locked critical sections and/or to send data from one processor to another. Assume a program requires t = 100 s of execution time on one processor. When run p processors, each processor requires t/p s, as well as an additional 4 s of overhead, irrespective of the number of processors. Compute the per-processor execution time for 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, and 128 processors. For each case, list the corresponding speedup relative to a single processor and the ratio between actual speedup versus ideal speedup (speedup if there was no overhead).

 1.15  Exercises §1.1, page 10: Discussion questions: many answers are acceptable. §1.4, page 24: DRAM memory: volatile, short access time of 50 to 70 nanoseconds, and cost per GB is $5 to $10. Disk memory: nonvolatile, access times are 100,000 to 400,000 times slower than DRAM, and cost per GB is 100 times cheaper than DRAM. Flash memory: nonvolatile, access times are 100 to 1000 times slower than DRAM, and cost per GB is 7 to 10 times cheaper than DRAM. §1.5, page 28: 1, 3, and 4 are valid reasons. Answer 5 can be generally true because high volume can make the extra investment to reduce die size by, say, 10% a good economic decision, but it doesn’t have to be true. §1.6, page 33: 1. a: both, b: latency, c: neither. 7 seconds. §1.6, page 40: b. §1.11, page 54: a. Computer A has the higher MIPS rating. b. Computer B is faster. Answers to Check Yourself

Instructions: Language of the Computer 2.1 Introduction  68 2.2 Operations of the Computer Hardware  69 2.3 Operands of the Computer Hardware  73 2.4 Signed and Unsigned Numbers  80 2.5 Representing Instructions in the Computer  87 2.6 Logical Operations  95 2.7 Instructions for Making Decisions  98 2.8 Supporting Procedures in Computer Hardware  104 2.9 Communicating with People  114 I speak Spanish to God, Italian to women, French to men, and German to my horse. Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor (1500–1558) Computer Organization and Design RISC-V Edition. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-820331-6.00002-8 © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2.10 RISC-V Addressing for Wide Immediates and Addresses  120 2.11 Parallelism and Instructions: Synchronization  128 2.12 Translating and Starting a Program  131 2.13 A C Sort Example to Put it All Together  140 2.14 Arrays versus Pointers  148 2.15 Advanced Material: Compiling C and Interpreting Java  151 2.16 Real Stuff: MIPS Instructions  152 2.17 Real Stuff: ARMv7 (32-bit) Instructions  153 2.18 Real Stuff: ARMv8 (64-bit) Instructions  157 2.19 Real Stuff: x86 Instructions  158 2.20 Real Stuff: The Rest of the RISC-V Instruction Set  167 2.21 Going Faster: Matrix Multiply in C  168 2.22 Fallacies and Pitfalls  170 2.23 Concluding Remarks  172 2.24 Historical Perspective and Further Reading  174 2.25 Self-Study  175 2.26 Exercises  178 The Five Classic Components of a Computer

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer 2.1 Introduction To command a computer’s hardware, you must speak its language. The words of a computer’s language are called instructions, and its vocabulary is called an instruction set. In this chapter, you will see the instruction set of a real computer, both in the form written by people and in the form read by the computer. We introduce instructions in a top-down fashion. Starting from a notation that looks like a restricted programming language, we refine it step-by-step until you see the actual language of a real computer. Chapter 3 continues our downward descent, unveiling the hardware for arithmetic and the representation of floating-point numbers. You might think that the languages of computers would be as diverse as those of people, but in reality, computer languages are quite similar, more like regional dialects than independent languages. Hence, once you learn one, it is easy to pick up others. The chosen instruction set is RISC-V, which was originally developed at UC Berkeley starting in 2010. To demonstrate how easy it is to pick up other instruction sets, we will also take a quick look at two other popular instruction sets. 1. MIPS is an elegant example of the instruction sets designed since the 1980s. In several respects, RISC-V follows a similar design. 2. The Intel x86 originated in the 1970s, but still today powers both the PC and the Cloud of the post-PC era. This similarity of instruction sets occurs because all computers are constructed from hardware technologies based on similar underlying principles and because there are a few basic operations that all computers must provide. Moreover, computer designers have a common goal: to find a language that makes it easy to build the hardware and the compiler while maximizing performance and minimizing cost and energy. This goal is time-honored; the following quote was written before you could buy a computer, and it is as true today as it was in 1946: It is easy to see by formal-logical methods that there exist certain [instruction sets] that are in abstract adequate to control and cause the execution of any sequence of operations.… The really decisive considerations from the present point of view, in selecting an [instruction set], are more of a practical nature: simplicity of the equipment demanded by the [instruction set], and the clarity of its application to the actually important problems together with the speed of its handling of those problems. Burks, Goldstine, and von Neumann, 1946 The “simplicity of the equipment” is as valuable a consideration for today’s computers as it was for those of the 1940s. The goal of this chapter is to teach an instruction set that follows this advice, showing both how it is represented in hardware and the relationship between high-level programming languages and this instruction set  The vocabulary of commands understood by a given architecture.

 2.2  Operations of the Computer Hardware more primitive one. Our examples are in the C programming language; Section 2.15 shows how these would change for an object-oriented language like Java. By learning how to represent instructions, you will also discover the secret of computing: the stored-program concept. Moreover, you will exercise your “foreign language” skills by writing programs in the language of the computer and running them on the simulator that comes with this book. You will also see the impact of programming languages and compiler optimization on performance. We conclude with a look at the historical evolution of instruction sets and an overview of other computer dialects. We reveal our first instruction set a piece at a time, giving the rationale along with the computer structures. This top-down, step-by-step tutorial weaves the components with their explanations, making the computer’s language more palatable. Figure 2.1 gives a sneak preview of the instruction set covered in this chapter. Elaboration:  RISC-V is an open architecture that is controlled by RISC-V International, not a proprietary architecture that is owned by a company like ARM, MIPS, or x86. In 2020, more than 200 companies are members of RISC-V International, and its popularity is growing rapidly. 2.2 Operations of the Computer Hardware Every computer must be able to perform arithmetic. The RISC-V assembly language notation add a, b, c instructs a computer to add the two variables b and c and to put their sum in a. This notation is rigid in that each RISC-V arithmetic instruction performs only one operation and must always have exactly three variables. For example, suppose we want to place the sum of four variables b, c, d, and e into variable a. (In this section, we are being deliberately vague about what a “variable” is; in the next section, we’ll explain in detail.) The following sequence of instructions adds the four variables: add a, b, c        // The sum of b and c is placed in a add a, a, d        // The sum of b, c, and d is now in a add a, a, e        // The sum of b, c, d, and e is now in a Thus, it takes three instructions to sum the four variables. The words to the right of the double slashes (//) on each line above are comments for the human reader, so the computer ignores them. Note that unlike other programming languages, each line of this language can contain at most one instruction. Another difference from C is that comments always terminate at the end of a line. stored-program concept  The idea that instructions and data of many types can be stored in memory as numbers and thus be easy to change, leading to the stored-program computer. There must certainly be instructions for performing the fundamental arithmetic operations. Burks, Goldstine, and von Neumann, 1946

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer FIGURE 2.1  RISC-V assembly language revealed in this chapter. This information is also found in Column 1 of the RISC-V Reference Data Card at the front of this book.

 2.2  Operations of the Computer Hardware The natural number of operands for an operation like addition is three: the two numbers being added together and a place to put the sum. Requiring every instruction to have exactly three operands, no more and no less, conforms to the philosophy of keeping the hardware simple: hardware for a variable number of operands is more complicated than hardware for a fixed number. This situation illustrates the first of three underlying principles of hardware design: Design Principle 1: Simplicity favors regularity. We can now show, in the two examples that follow, the relationship of programs written in higher-level programming languages to programs in this more primitive notation. Compiling Two C Assignment Statements into RISC-V This segment of a C program contains the five variables a, b, c, d, and e. Since Java evolved from C, this example and the next few work for either high-level programming language: a = b + c; d = a − e; The compiler translates from C to RISC-V assembly language instructions. Show the RISC-V code produced by a compiler. A RISC-V instruction operates on two source operands and places the result in one destination operand. Hence, the two simple statements above compile directly into these two RISC-V assembly language instructions: add a, b, c sub d, a, e FIGURE 2.1  (Continued). EXAMPLE ANSWER

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer Compiling a Complex C Assignment into RISC-V A somewhat complicated statement contains the five variables f, g, h, i, and j: f = (g + h) − (i + j); What might a C compiler produce? The compiler must break this statement into several assembly instructions, since only one operation is performed per RISC-V instruction. The first RISC-V instruction calculates the sum of g and h. We must place the result somewhere, so the compiler creates a temporary variable, called t0: add t0, g, h // temporary variable t0 contains g + h Although the next operation is subtract, we need to calculate the sum of i and j before we can subtract. Thus, the second instruction places the sum of i and j in another temporary variable created by the compiler, called t1: add t1, i, j // temporary variable t1 contains i + j Finally, the subtract instruction subtracts the second sum from the first and places the difference in the variable f, completing the compiled code: sub f, t0, t1 // f gets t0 − t1, which is (g + h) − (i + j) Elaboration:  To increase portability, Java was originally envisioned as relying on a software interpreter. The instruction set of this interpreter is called Java bytecodes (see Section 2.15), which is quite different from the RISC-V instruction set. To get performance close to the equivalent C program, Java systems today typically compile Java bytecodes into the native instruction sets like RISC-V. Because this compilation is normally done much later than for C programs, such Java compilers are often called Just In Time (JIT) compilers. Section 2.12 shows how JITs are used later than C compilers in the start-up process, and Section 2.13 shows the performance consequences of compiling versus interpreting Java programs. EXAMPLE ANSWER Check Yourself For a given function, which programming language likely takes the most lines of code? Put the three representations below in order. 1. Java 2. C 3. RISC-V assembly language

 2.3  Operands of the Computer Hardware 2.3 Operands of the Computer Hardware Unlike programs in high-level languages, the operands of arithmetic instructions are restricted; they must be from a limited number of special locations built directly in hardware called registers. Registers are primitives used in hardware design that are also visible to the programmer when the computer is completed, so you can think of registers as the bricks of computer construction. The size of a register in the RISC-V architecture is 32 bits; groups of 32 bits occur so frequently that they are given the name word in the RISC-V architecture. (Another popular size is a group of 64 bits, called a doubleword in the RISC-V architecture.) One major difference between the variables of a programming language and registers is the limited number of registers, typically 32 on current computers, like RISC-V. (See Section 2.25 for the history of the number of registers.) Thus, continuing in our top-down, stepwise evolution of the symbolic representation of the RISC-V language, in this section we have added the restriction that the three operands of RISC-V arithmetic instructions must each be chosen from one of the 32-bit registers. The reason for the limit of 32 registers may be found in the second of our three underlying design principles of hardware technology: Design Principle 2: Smaller is faster. A very large number of registers may increase the clock cycle time simply because it takes electronic signals longer when they must travel farther. Guidelines such as “smaller is faster” are not absolutes; 31 registers may not be faster than 32. Even so, the truth behind such observations causes computer designers to take them seriously. In this case, the designer must balance the craving of programs for more registers with the designer’s desire to keep the clock cycle fast. Another reason for not using more than 32 is the number of bits it would take in the instruction format, as Section 2.5 demonstrates. Chapter 4 shows the central role that registers play in hardware construction; as we shall see in that chapter, effective use of registers is critical to program performance. Although we could simply write instructions using numbers for registers, from 0 to 31, the RISC-V convention is x followed by the number of the register, except for a few register names that we will cover later. Compiling a C Assignment Using Registers It is the compiler’s job to associate program variables with registers. Take, for instance, the assignment statement from our earlier example: f = (g + h) − (i + j); doubleword  Another natural unit of access in a computer, usually a group of 64 bits. word  A natural unit of access in a computer, usually a group of 32 bits; corresponds to the size of a register in the RISC-V architecture. EXAMPLE

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer The variables f, g, h, i, and j are assigned to the registers x19, x20, x21, x22, and x23, respectively. What is the compiled RISC-V code? The compiled program is very similar to the prior example, except we replace the variables with the register names mentioned above plus two temporary registers, x5 and x6, which correspond to the temporary variables above: add x5, x20, x21 // register x5 contains g + h add x6, x22, x23 // register x6 contains i + j sub x19, x5, x6 // f gets x5 – x6, which is (g + h) − (i + j) Memory Operands Programming languages have simple variables that contain single data elements, as in these examples, but they also have more complex data structures—arrays and structures. These composite data structures can contain many more data elements than there are registers in a computer. How can a computer represent and access such large structures? Recall the five components of a computer introduced in Chapter 1 and repeated on page 67. The processor can keep only a small amount of data in registers, but computer memory contains billions of data elements. Hence, data structures (arrays and structures) are kept in memory. As explained above, arithmetic operations occur only on registers in RISC-V instructions; thus, RISC-V must include instructions that transfer data between memory and registers. Such instructions are called data transfer instructions. To access a word in memory, the instruction must supply the memory address. Memory is just a large, single-dimensional array, with the address acting as the index to that array, starting at 0. For example, in Figure 2.2, the address of the third data element is 2, and the value of memory [2] is 10. data transfer instruction  A command that moves data between memory and registers. address  A value used to delineate the location of a specific data element within a memory array. ANSWER Processor Memory Address Data FIGURE 2.2  Memory addresses and contents of memory at those locations. If these elements were words, these addresses would be incorrect, since RISC-V actually uses byte addressing, with each word representing 4 bytes. Figure 2.3 shows the correct memory addressing for sequential word addresses.

 2.3  Operands of the Computer Hardware The data transfer instruction that copies data from memory to a register is traditionally called load. The format of the load instruction is the name of the operation followed by the register to be loaded, then register and a constant used to access memory. The sum of the constant portion of the instruction and the contents of the second register forms the memory address. The real RISC-V name for this instruction is lw, standing for load word. Compiling an Assignment When an Operand Is in Memory Let’s assume that A is an array of 100 words and that the compiler has associated the variables g and h with the registers x20 and x21 as before. Let’s also assume that the starting address, or base address, of the array is in x22. Compile this C assignment statement: g = h + A[8]; Although there is a single operation in this assignment statement, one of the operands is in memory, so we must first transfer A[8] to a register. The address of this array element is the sum of the base of the array A, found in register x22, plus the number to select element 8. The data should be placed in a temporary register for use in the next instruction. Based on Figure 2.2, the first compiled instruction is lw    x9, 8(x22) // Temporary reg x9 gets A[8] (We’ll be making a slight adjustment to this instruction, but we’ll use this simplified version for now.) The following instruction can operate on the value in x9 (which equals A[8]) since it is in a register. The instruction must add h (contained in x21) to A[8] (contained in x9) and put the sum in the register corresponding to g (associated with x20): add  x20, x21, x9 // g = h + A[8] The register added to form the address (x22) is called the base register, and the constant in a data transfer instruction (8) is called the offset. EXAMPLE ANSWER In addition to associating variables with registers, the compiler allocates data structures like arrays and structures to locations in memory. The compiler can then place the proper starting address into the data transfer instructions. Since 8-bit bytes are useful in many programs, virtually all architectures today address individual bytes. Therefore, the address of a word matches the address of one of the 4 bytes within the word, and addresses of sequential words differ by Hardware/ Software Interface

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer The instruction complementary to load is traditionally called store; it copies data from a register to memory. The format of a store is similar to that of a load: the name of the operation, followed by the register to be stored, then the base register, and finally the offset to select the array element. Once again, the RISC-V address is specified in part by a constant and in part by the contents of a register. The actual RISC-V name is sw, standing for store word. Processor Memory Byte Address Data FIGURE 2.3  Actual RISC-V memory addresses and contents of memory for those words. The changed addresses are highlighted to contrast with Figure 2.2. Since RISC-V addresses each byte, word addresses are multiples of 4: there are 4 bytes in a doubleword. Elaboration:  In many architectures, words must start at addresses that are multiples of 4. This requirement is called an alignment restriction. (Chapter 4 suggests why alignment leads to faster data transfers.) RISC-V and Intel x86 do not have alignment restrictions, but MIPS does. alignment restriction  A requirement that data be aligned in memory on natural boundaries. Hardware/ Software Interface As the addresses in loads and stores are binary numbers, we can see why the DRAM for main memory comes in binary sizes rather than in decimal sizes. That is, in gibibytes (230) or tebibytes (240), not in gigabytes (109) or terabytes (1012); see Figure 1.1. 4. For example, Figure 2.3 shows the actual RISC-V addresses for the words in Figure 2.2; the byte address of the third word is 8. Computers divide into those that use the address of the leftmost or “big end” byte as the word address versus those that use the rightmost or “little end” byte. RISC-V belongs to the latter camp, referred to as little-endian. Since the order matters only if you access the identical data both as a word and as four individual bytes, few need to be aware of the “endianness.” Byte addressing also affects the array index. To get the proper byte address in the code above, the offset to be added to the base register x22 must be 8 × 4, or 32, so that the load address will select A[8] and not A[8/4]. (See the related Pitfall on page 172 of Section 2.22.)

 2.3  Operands of the Computer Hardware Compiling Using Load and Store Assume variable h is associated with register x21 and the base address of the array A is in x22. What is the RISC-V assembly code for the C assignment statement below? A[12] = h + A[8]; Although there is a single operation in the C statement, now two of the operands are in memory, so we need even more RISC-V instructions. The first two instructions are the same as in the prior example, except this time we use the proper offset of 32 for byte addressing in the load register instruction to select A[8], and the add instruction places the sum in x9: lw x9, 32(x22) // Temporary reg x9 gets A[8] add x9, x21, x9 // Temporary reg x9 gets h + A[8] The final instruction stores the sum into A[12], using 48 (4 × 12) as the offset and register x22 as the base register. sw x9, 48(x22) // Stores h + A[8] back into A[12] Load word and store word are the instructions that copy words between memory and registers in the RISC-V architecture. Some brands of computers use other instructions along with load and store to transfer data. An architecture with such alternatives is the Intel x86, described in Section 2.17. EXAMPLE ANSWER Hardware/ Software Interface Many programs have more variables than computers have registers. Consequently, the compiler tries to keep the most frequently used variables in registers and places the rest in memory, using loads and stores to move variables between registers and memory. The process of putting less frequently used variables (or those needed later) into memory is called spilling registers. The hardware principle relating size and speed suggests that memory must be slower than registers, since there are fewer registers. This suggestion is indeed the case; data accesses are faster if data are in registers instead of memory. Moreover, data are more useful when in a register. A RISC-V arithmetic instruction can read two registers, operate on them, and write the result. A RISC-V data transfer instruction only reads one operand or writes one operand, without operating on it.

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer Elaboration:  Let’s put the energy and performance of registers versus memory into perspective. Assuming 32-bit data, registers are roughly 200 times faster (0.25 vs. 50 nanoseconds) and are 10,000 times more energy efficient (0.1 vs. 1000 picoJoules) than DRAM in 2020. These large differences led to caches, which reduce the performance and energy penalties of going to memory (see Chapter 5). Constant or Immediate Operands Many times a program will use a constant in an operation—for example, incrementing an index to point to the next element of an array. In fact, more than half of the RISC-V arithmetic instructions have a constant as an operand when running the SPEC CPU2006 benchmarks. Using only the instructions we have seen so far, we would have to load a constant from memory to use one. (The constants would have been placed in memory when the program was loaded.) For example, to add the constant 4 to register x22, we could use the code lw x9, AddrConstant4(x3)        // x9 = constant 4 add x22, x22, x9                    // x22 = x22 + x9 (where x9 == 4) assuming that x3 + AddrConstant4 is the memory address of the constant 4. An alternative that avoids the load instruction is to offer versions of the arithmetic instructions in which one operand is a constant. This quick add instruction with one constant operand is called add immediate or addi. To add 4 to register x22, we just write addi      x22, x22, 4      // x22 = x22 + 4 Constant operands occur frequently; indeed, addi is the most popular instruction in most RISC-V programs. By including constants inside arithmetic instructions, operations are much faster and use less energy than if constants were loaded from memory. The constant zero has another role, which is to simplify the instruction set by offering useful variations. For example, you can negate the value in a register by using the sub instruction with zero for the first operand. Hence, RISC-V dedicates register x0 to be hard-wired to the value zero. Using frequency to justify the inclusions of constants is another example of the great idea from Chapter 1 of making the common case fast. Thus, registers take less time to access and have higher throughput than memory, making data in registers both considerably faster to access and simpler to use. Accessing registers also uses much less energy than accessing memory. To achieve the highest performance and conserve energy, an instruction set architecture must have enough registers, and compilers must use registers efficiently.

 2.3  Operands of the Computer Hardware Check Yourself Given the importance of registers, what is the rate of increase in the number of registers in a chip over time? 1. Very fast: They increased as fast as Moore’s Law, which predicted doubling the number of transistors on a chip every 24 months. 2. Very slow: Since programs are usually distributed in the language of the computer, there is inertia in instruction set architecture, and so the number of registers increases only as fast as new instruction sets become viable. Elaboration:  Although the RISC-V registers in this book are 32 bits wide, the RISC-V architects conceived multiple variants of the ISA. In addition to this variant, known as RV32, a variant named RV64 has 64-bit registers, whose larger addresses make RV64 better suited to processors for servers and smart phones. Elaboration:  The RISC-V offset plus base register addressing is an excellent match to structures as well as arrays, since the register can point to the beginning of the structure and the offset can select the desired element. We’ll see such an example in Section 2.13. Elaboration:  The register in the data transfer instructions was originally invented to hold an index of an array with the offset used for the starting address of an array. Thus, the base register is also called the index register. Today’s memories are much larger, and the software model of data allocation is more sophisticated, so the base address of the array is normally passed in a register since it won’t fit in the offset, as we shall see. Elaboration:  The migration from 32-bit address computers to 64-bit address computers left compiler writers a choice of the size of data types in C. Clearly, pointers should be 64 bits, but what about integers? Moreover, C has the data types int, long int, and long long int. The problems come from converting from one data type to another and having an unexpected overflow in C code that is not fully standard compliant, which unfortunately is not rare code. The table below shows the two popular options: Operating System pointers int long int long long int Microsoft Windows 64 bits 32 bits 32 bits 64 bits Linux, Most Unix 64 bits 32 bits 64 bits 64 bits

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer 2.4 Signed and Unsigned Numbers First, let’s quickly review how a computer represents numbers. Because people have 10 fingers, we are taught to think in base 10, but numbers may be represented in any base. For example, 123 base 10 = 1111011 base 2. Numbers are kept in computer hardware as a series of high and low electronic signals, and so they are considered base 2 numbers. (Just as base 10 numbers are called decimal numbers, base 2 numbers are called binary numbers.) A single digit of a binary number is thus the “atom” of computing, since all information is composed of binary digits or bits. This fundamental building block can be one of two values, which can be thought of as several alternatives: high or low, on or off, true or false, or 1 or 0. Generalizing the point, in any number base, the value of ith digit d is d i  Base where i starts at 0 and increases from right to left. This representation leads to an obvious way to number the bits in the doubleword: simply use the power of the base for that bit. We subscript decimal numbers with ten and binary numbers with two. For example, 1011two represents (1 × 23) + (0 × 22) + (1 × 21) + (1 × 20)ten = (1 × 8)    + (0 × 4)   + (1 × 2)    + (1 × 1)ten = + + + 1ten = 11ten We number the bits 0, 1, 2, 3, … from right to left in a doubleword. The drawing below shows the numbering of bits within a RISC-V word and the placement of the number 1011two: Since words are drawn vertically as well as horizontally, leftmost and rightmost may be unclear. Hence, the phrase least significant bit is used to refer to the rightmost bit (bit 0 above) and most significant bit to the leftmost bit (bit 31). The RISC-V word is 32 bits long, so it can represent 232 different 32-bit patterns. It is natural to let these combinations represent the numbers from 0 to 232 −1 (4,294,967,295ten): binary digit  Also called bit. One of the two numbers in base 2, 0 or 1, that are the components of information. least significant bit  The rightmost bit in an RISC-V word. most significant bit  The leftmost bit in an RISC-V word.

 2.4  Signed and Unsigned Numbers 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000two = 0ten 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000001two = 1ten 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000010two = 2ten . . .                              . . . 11111111 11111111 11111111 11111101two = 4,294,967,293ten 11111111 11111111 11111111 11111110two = 4,294,967,294ten 11111111 11111111 11111111 11111111two = 4,294,967,295ten That is, 32-bit binary numbers can be represented in terms of the bit value times a power of 2 (here xi means the ith bit of x): For reasons we will shortly see, these positive numbers are called unsigned numbers. Base 2 is not natural to human beings; we have 10 fingers and so find base 10 natural. Why didn’t computers use decimal? In fact, the first commercial computer did offer decimal arithmetic. The problem was that the computer still used on and off signals, so a decimal digit was simply represented by several binary digits. Decimal proved so inefficient that subsequent computers reverted to all binary, converting to base 10 only for the relatively infrequent input/output events. Keep in mind that the binary bit patterns above are simply representatives of numbers. Numbers really have an infinite number of digits, with almost all being 0 except for a few of the rightmost digits. We just don’t normally show leading 0s. Hardware can be designed to add, subtract, multiply, and divide these binary bit patterns, as we’ll see in Chapter 3. If the number that is the proper result of such operations cannot be represented by these rightmost hardware bits, overflow is said to have occurred. It’s up to the programming language, the operating system, and the program to determine what to do if overflow occurs. Computer programs calculate both positive and negative numbers, so we need a representation that distinguishes the positive from the negative. The most obvious solution is to add a separate sign, which conveniently can be represented in a single bit; the name for this representation is sign and magnitude. Alas, sign and magnitude representation has several shortcomings. First, it’s not obvious where to put the sign bit. To the right? To the left? Early computers tried both. Second, adders for sign and magnitude may need an extra step to set the sign overflow  when the results of an operation are larger than be represented in a register Hardware/ Software Interface

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer because we can’t know in advance what the proper sign of the sum will be. Finally, a separate sign bit means that sign and magnitude has both a positive and a negative zero, which can lead to problems for inattentive programmers. Because of these shortcomings, sign and magnitude representation was soon abandoned. In the search for a more attractive alternative, the question arose as to what would be the result for unsigned numbers if we tried to subtract a large number from a small one. The answer is that it would try to borrow from a string of leading 0s, so the result would have a string of leading 1s. Given that there was no obvious better alternative, the final solution was to pick the representation that made the hardware simple: leading 0s mean positive, and leading 1s mean negative. This convention for representing signed binary numbers is called two’s complement representation (an Elaboration on page 81 explains this unusual name): 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000two = 0ten 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000001two = 1ten 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000010two = 2ten . . .                                  . . . 01111111 11111111 11111111 11111101two = 2,147,483,645ten 01111111 11111111 11111111 11111110two = 2,147,483,646ten 01111111 11111111 11111111 11111111two = 2,147,483,647ten 10000000 00000000 00000000 00000000two = − 2,147,483,648ten 10000000 00000000 00000000 00000001two = − 2,147,483,647ten 10000000 00000000 00000000 00000010two = − 2,147,483,646ten …                                                    . . . 11111111 11111111 11111111 11111101two = − 3ten 11111111 11111111 11111111 11111110two = − 2ten 11111111 11111111 11111111 11111111two = − 1ten The positive half of the numbers, from 0 to 2,147,483,647ten (231−1), use the same representation as before. The following bit pattern (1000 … 0000two) represents the most negative number -2,147,483,648ten (−231). It is followed by a declining set of negative numbers: -2,147,483,647ten (1000 … 0001two) down to −1ten (1111 … 1111two). Two’s complement does have one negative number that has no corresponding positive number: -2,147,483,648ten. Such imbalance was also a worry to the inattentive programmer, but sign and magnitude had problems for both the programmer and the hardware designer. Consequently, every computer today uses two’s complement binary representations for signed numbers.

 2.4  Signed and Unsigned Numbers Two’s complement representation has the advantage that all negative numbers have a 1 in the most significant bit. Thus, hardware needs to test only this bit to see if a number is positive or negative (with the number 0 is considered positive). This bit is often called the sign bit. By recognizing the role of the sign bit, we can represent positive and negative 32-bit numbers in terms of the bit value times a power of 2: The sign bit is multiplied by −231, and the rest of the bits are then multiplied by positive versions of their respective base values. Binary to Decimal Conversion What is the decimal value of this 32-bit two’s complement number? 11111111 11111111 11111111 11111100two Substituting the number’s bit values into the formula above: We’ll see a shortcut to simplify conversion from negative to positive soon. Just as an operation on unsigned numbers can overflow the capacity of hardware to represent the result, so can an operation on two’s complement numbers. Overflow occurs when the leftmost retained bit of the binary bit pattern is not the same as the infinite number of digits to the left (the sign bit is incorrect): a 0 on the left of the bit pattern when the number is negative or a 1 when the number is positive. EXAMPLE ANSWER

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer Signed versus unsigned applies to loads as well as to arithmetic. The function of a signed load is to copy the sign repeatedly to fill the rest of the register—called sign extension—but its purpose is to place a correct representation of the number within that register. Unsigned loads simply fill with 0s to the left of the data, since the number represented by the bit pattern is unsigned. When loading a 32-bit word into a 32-bit register, the point is moot; signed and unsigned loads are identical. RISC-V does offer two flavors of byte loads: load byte unsigned (lbu) treats the byte as an unsigned number and thus zero-extends to fill the leftmost bits of the register, while load byte (lb) works with signed integers. Since C programs almost always use bytes to represent characters rather than consider bytes as very short signed integers, lbu is used practically exclusively for byte loads. Unlike the signed numbers discussed above, memory addresses naturally start at 0 and continue to the largest address. Put another way, negative addresses make no sense. Thus, programs want to deal sometimes with numbers that can be positive or negative and sometimes with numbers that can be only positive. Some programming languages reflect this distinction. C, for example, names the former integers (declared as int in the program) and the latter unsigned integers (unsigned int). Some C style guides even recommend declaring the former as signed int to keep the distinction clear. Let’s examine two useful shortcuts when working with two’s complement numbers. The first shortcut is a quick way to negate a two’s complement binary number. Simply invert every 0 to 1 and every 1 to 0, then add one to the result. This shortcut is based on the observation that the sum of a number and its inverted representation must be 111 … 111two, which represents −1. Since x x   1, therefore x x    0 or x x    . (We use the notation x to mean invert every bit in x from 0 to 1 and vice versa.) Negation Shortcut Negate 2ten, and then check the result by negating −2ten. 2ten = 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000010two Hardware/ Software Interface Hardware/ Software Interface EXAMPLE ANSWER

 2.4  Signed and Unsigned Numbers Negating this number by inverting the bits and adding one, Going the other direction, 11111111 11111111 11111111 11111110two is first inverted and then incremented: Our next shortcut tells us how to convert a binary number represented in n bits to a number represented with more than n bits. The shortcut is to take the most significant bit from the smaller quantity—the sign bit—and replicate it to fill the new bits of the larger quantity. The old nonsign bits are simply copied into the right portion of the new doubleword. This shortcut is called sign extension. Sign Extension Shortcut Convert 16-bit binary versions of 2ten and −2ten to 32-bit binary numbers. The 16-bit binary version of the number 2 is 00000000 00000010two = 2ten It is converted to a 32-bit number by making 16 copies of the value in the most significant bit (0) and placing that in the left of the word. The right part gets the old value: 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000010two = 2tenM EXAMPLE ANSWER

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer Let’s negate the 16-bit version of 2 using the earlier shortcut. Thus, 0000 0000 0000 0010two becomes Creating a 32-bit version of the negative number means copying the sign bit 16 times and placing it on the left: 11111111 11111111 11111111 11111110two = −2ten This trick works because positive two’s complement numbers really have an infinite number of 0s on the left and negative two’s complement numbers have an infinite number of 1s. The binary bit pattern representing a number hides leading bits to fit the width of the hardware; sign extension simply restores some of them. Summary The main point of this section is that we need to represent both positive and negative integers within a computer, and although there are pros and cons to any option, the unanimous choice since 1965 has been two’s complement. Elaboration:  For signed decimal numbers, we used “−” to represent negative because there are no limits to the size of a decimal number. Given a fixed data size, binary and hexadecimal (see Figure 2.4) bit strings can encode the sign; therefore, we do not normally use “+” or “−” with binary or hexadecimal notation. What is the decimal value of this 64-bit two’s complement number? 11111111 11111111 11111111 11111111 11111111 11111111 11111111 11111000two 1) −4ten 2) −8ten 3) −16ten 4) 18,446,744,073,709,551,608ten What is the decimal value if it is instead a 64-bit unsigned number? 1111 1111 1111 1101two + 1two = 1111 1111 1111 1110two Check Yourself

 2.5  Representing Instructions in the Computer Elaboration:  Two’s complement gets its name from the rule that the unsigned sum of an n-bit number and its n-bit negative is 2n; hence, the negation or complement of a number x is 2n − x, or its “two’s complement.” A third alternative representation to two’s complement and sign and magnitude is called one’s complement. The negative of a one’s complement is found by inverting each bit, from 0 to 1 and from 1 to 0, or x . This relation helps explain its name since the complement of x is 2n − x − 1. It was also an attempt to be a better solution than sign and magnitude, and several early scientific computers did use the notation. This representation is similar to two’s complement except that it also has two 0s: 00 … 00two is positive 0 and 11 … 11two is negative 0. The most negative number, 10 … 000two, represents −2,147,483,647ten, and so the positives and negatives are balanced. One’s complement adders did need an extra step to subtract a number, and hence two’s complement dominates today. A final notation, which we will look at when we discuss floating point in Chapter 3, is to represent the most negative value by 00 … 000two and the most positive value by 11 … 11two, with 0 typically having the value 10 … 00two. This representation is called a biased notation, since it biases the number such that the number plus the bias has a non-negative representation. 2.5 Representing Instructions in the Computer We are now ready to explain the difference between the way humans instruct computers and the way computers see instructions. Instructions are kept in the computer as a series of high and low electronic signals and may be represented as numbers. In fact, each piece of an instruction can be considered as an individual number, and placing these numbers side by side forms the instruction. The 32 registers of RISC-V are just referred to by their number, from 0 to 31. Translating a RISC-V Assembly Instruction into a Machine Instruction Let’s do the next step in the refinement of the RISC-V language as an example. We’ll show the real RISC-V language version of the instruction represented symbolically as add x9, x20, x21 first as a combination of decimal numbers and then of binary numbers. The decimal representation is one’s complement  A notation that represents the most negative value by 10 … 000two and the most positive value by 01 … 11two, leaving an equal number of negatives and positives but ending up with two zeros, one positive (00 … 00two) and one negative (11 … 11two). The term is also used to mean the inversion of every bit in a pattern: 0 to 1 and 1 to 0. biased notation  A notation that represents the most negative value by 00 … 000two and the most positive value by 11 … 11two, with 0 typically having the value 10 … 00two, thereby biasing the number such that the number plus the bias has a non-negative representation. EXAMPLE ANSWER

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer Each of these segments of an instruction is called a field. The first, fourth, and sixth fields (containing 0, 0, and 51 in this case) collectively tell the RISC-V computer that this instruction performs addition. The second field gives the number of the register that is the second source operand of the addition operation (21 for x21), and the third field gives the other source operand for the addition (20 for x20). The fifth field contains the number of the register that is to receive the sum (9 for x9). Thus, this instruction adds register x20 to register x21 and places the sum in register x9. This instruction can also be represented as fields of binary numbers instead of decimal: 7 bits 5 bits 5 bits 3 bits 5 bits 7 bits This layout of the instruction is called the instruction format. As you can see from counting the number of bits, this RISC-V instruction takes exactly 32 bits—a word. In keeping with our design principle that simplicity favors regularity, RISC-V instructions are all 32 bits long. To distinguish it from assembly language, we call the numeric version of instructions machine language and a sequence of such instructions machine code. It would appear that you would now be reading and writing long, tiresome strings of binary numbers. We avoid that tedium by using a higher base than binary that converts easily into binary. Since almost all computer data sizes are multiples of 4, hexadecimal (base 16) numbers are popular. As base 16 is a power of 2, we can trivially convert by replacing each group of four binary digits by a single hexadecimal digit, and vice versa. Figure 2.4 converts between hexadecimal and binary. instruction format  A form of representation of an instruction composed of fields of binary numbers. machine language  Binary representation used for communication within a computer system. hexadecimal  Numbers in base 16. FIGURE 2.4  The hexadecimal–binary conversion table. Just replace one hexadecimal digit by the corresponding four binary digits, and vice versa. If the length of the binary number is not a multiple of 4, go from right to left. Because we frequently deal with different number bases, to avoid confusion, we will subscript decimal numbers with ten, binary numbers with two, and hexadecimal numbers with hex. (If there is no subscript, the default is base 10.) By the way, C and Java use the notation 0xnnnn for hexadecimal numbers.

 2.5  Representing Instructions in the Computer Binary to Hexadecimal and Back Convert the following 8-digit hexadecimal and 32-bit binary numbers into the other base: eca8  6420hex 0001  0011  0101  0111  1001  1011  1101  1111two Using Figure 2.4, the answer is just a table lookup one way: eca8 6420hex 1110 1100 1000 0110 0100 0010 0000two And then the other direction: 0001 0011 0101 0111 1001 1011 1111two 1357 9bdfhex RISC-V Fields RISC-V fields are given names to make them easier to discuss: funct7 rs2 rs1 funct3 rd opcode 7 bits 5 bits 5 bits 3 bits 5 bits 7 bits Here is the meaning of each name of the fields in RISC-V instructions: n opcode: Basic operation of the instruction, and this abbreviation is its traditional name. n rd: The register destination operand. It gets the result of the operation. n funct3: An additional opcode field. n rs1: The first register source operand. n rs2: The second register source operand. n funct7: An additional opcode field. opcode  The field that denotes the operation and format of an instruction. EXAMPLE ANSWER

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer A problem occurs when an instruction needs longer fields than those shown above. For example, the load register instruction must specify two registers and a constant. If the address were to use one of the 5-bit fields in the format above, the largest constant within the load register instruction would be limited to only 25−1 or 31. This constant is used to select elements from arrays or data structures, and it often needs to be much larger than 31. This 5-bit field is too small to be useful. Hence, we have a conflict between the desire to keep all instructions the same length and the desire to have a single instruction format. This conflict leads us to the final hardware design principle: Design Principle 3: Good design demands good compromises. The compromise chosen by the RISC-V designers is to keep all instructions the same length, thereby requiring distinct instruction formats for different kinds of instructions. For example, the format above is called R-type (for register). A second type of instruction format is I-type and is used by arithmetic operands with one constant operand, including addi, and by load instructions. The fields of the I-type format are immediate rs1 funct3 rd opcode 12 bits 5 bits 3 bits 5 bits 7 bits The 12-bit immediate is interpreted as a two’s complement value, so it can represent integers from −211 to 211−1. When the I-type format is used for load instructions, the immediate represents a byte offset, so the load word instruction can refer to any word within a region of ±211 or 2048 bytes (±28 or 512 words) of the base address in the base register rd. We see that more than 32 registers would be difficult in this format, as the rd and rs1 fields would each need another bit, making it harder to fit everything in one word. Let’s look at the load register instruction from page 77: lw x9, 32(x22) // Temporary reg x9 gets A[8] Here, 22 (for x22) is placed in the rs1 field, 32 is placed in the immediate field, and 9 (for x9) is placed in the rd field. We also need a format for the store word instruction, sw, which needs two source registers (for the base address and the store data) and an immediate for the address offset. The fields of the S-type format are immediate[11:5] rs2 rs1 funct3 immediate[4:0] opcode 7 bits 5 bits 5 bits 3 bits 5 bits 7 bits The 12-bit immediate in the S-type format is split into two fields, which supply the lower 5 bits and upper 7 bits. The RISC-V architects chose this design because it keeps the rs1 and rs2 fields in the same place in all instruction formats. (Figure 4.14.5 shows how this split simplifies the hardware.) Keeping the instruction formats as 

 2.5  Representing Instructions in the Computer similar as possible reduces hardware complexity. Similarly, the opcode and funct3 fields are the same size in all locations, and they are always in the same place. In case you were wondering, the formats are distinguished by the values in the opcode field: each format is assigned a distinct set of opcode values in the first field (opcode) so that the hardware knows how to treat the rest of the instruction. Figure 2.5 shows the numbers used in each field for the RISC-V instructions covered so far. FIGURE 2.5  RISC-V instruction encoding. In the table above, “reg” means a register number between 0 and 31 and “address” means a 12-bit address or constant. The funct3 and funct7 fields act as additional opcode fields. Translating RISC-V Assembly Language into Machine Language We can now take an example all the way from what the programmer writes to what the computer executes. If x10 has the base of the array A and x21 corresponds to h, the assignment statement A[30] = h + A[30] + 1; is compiled into lw x9, 120(x10) // Temporary reg x9 gets A[30] add x9, x21, x9 // Temporary reg x9 gets h+A[30] addi x9, x9, 1 // Temporary reg x9 gets h+A[30]+1 sw x9, 120(x10) // Stores h+A[30]+1 back into A[30] What is the RISC-V machine language code for these three instructions? EXAMPLE ANSWER

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer For convenience, let’s first represent the machine language instructions using decimal numbers. From Figure 2.5, we can determine the three machine language instructions: immediate rs1 funct3 rd opcode funct7 rs2 rs1 funct3 rd opcode immediate rs1 funct3 rd opcode immediate[11:5] rs2 rs1 funct3 immediate[4:0] opcode The lw instruction is identified by 3 (see Figure 2.5) in the opcode field and 2 in the funct3 field. The base register 10 is specified in the rs1 field, and the destination register 9 is specified in the rd field. The offset to select A[30] (120 = 30 × 4) is found in the immediate field. The add instruction that follows is specified with 51 in the opcode field, 0 in the funct3 field, and 0 in the funct7 field. The three register operands (9, 21, and 9) are found in the rd, rs1, and rs2 fields. The subsequent addi instruction is specified with 19 in the opcode field and 0 in the funct3 field. The register operands (9 and 9) are found in the rd and rs1 fields, and the constant addend 1 is found in the immediate field. The sw instruction is identified with 35 in the opcode field and 2 in the funct3 field. The register operands (9 and 10) are found in the rs2 and rs1 fields, respectively. The address offset 120 is split across the two immediate fields. Since the upper part of the immediate holds bits 5 and above, we can decompose the offset 120 by dividing by 25. The upper part of the immediate holds the quotient, 3, and the lower part holds the remainder, 24. Since 120ten = 0000011 11000two, the binary equivalent to the decimal form is: immediate rs1 funct3 rd opcode funct7 rs2 rs1 funct3 rd opcode immediate rs1 funct3 rd opcode immediate[11:5] rs2 rs1 funct3 immediate[4:0] opcode

 2.5  Representing Instructions in the Computer Elaboration:  RISC-V assembly language programmers aren’t forced to use addi when working with constants. The programmer simply writes add, and the assembler generates the proper opcode and the proper instruction format depending on whether the operands are all registers (R-type) or if one is a constant (I-type); see Section 2.12. We use the explicit names in RISC-V for the different opcodes and formats as we think it is less confusing when introducing assembly language versus machine language. Elaboration:  Although RISC-V has both add and sub instructions, it does not have a subi counterpart to addi. This is because the immediate field represents a two’s complement integer, so addi can be used to subtract constants. The desire to keep all instructions the same size conflicts with the desire to have as many registers as possible. Any increase in the number of registers uses up at least one more bit in every register field of the instruction format. Given these constraints and the design principle that smaller is faster, most instruction sets today have 16 or 32 general-purpose registers. Hardware/ Software Interface Figure 2.6 summarizes the portions of RISC-V machine language described in this section. As we shall see in Chapter 4, the similarity of the binary representations of related instructions simplifies hardware design. These similarities are another example of regularity in the RISC-V architecture. FIGURE 2.6  RISC-V architecture revealed through Section 2.5. The three RISC-V instruction formats so far are R, I, and S. The R-type format has two source register operand and one destination register operand. The I-type format replaces one source register operand with a 12-bit immediate field. The S-type format has two source operands and a 12-bit immediate field, but no destination register operand. The S-type immediate field is split into two parts, with bits 11–5 in the leftmost field and bits 4–0 in the second-rightmost field.

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer Today’s computers are built on two key principles: 1. Instructions are represented as numbers. 2. Programs are stored in memory to be read or written, just like data. These principles lead to the stored-program concept; its invention let the computing genie out of its bottle. Figure 2.7 shows the power of the concept; specifically, memory can contain the source code for an editor program, the corresponding compiled machine code, the text that the compiled program is using, and even the compiler that generated the machine code. One consequence of instructions as numbers is that programs are often shipped as files of binary numbers. The commercial implication is that computers can inherit ready-made software provided they are compatible with an existing instruction set. Such “binary compatibility” often leads industry to align around a small number of instruction set architectures. The BIG Picture Memory Accounting program (machine code) Processor Editor program (machine code) C compiler (machine code) Payroll data Book text Source code in C for editor program FIGURE 2.7  The stored-program concept. Stored programs allow a computer that performs accounting to become, in the blink of an eye, a computer that helps an author write a book. The switch happens simply by loading memory with programs and data and then telling the computer to begin executing at a given location in memory. Treating instructions in the same way as data greatly simplifies both the memory hardware and the software of computer systems. Specifically, the memory technology needed for data can also be used for programs, and programs like compilers, for instance, can translate code written in a notation far more convenient for humans into code that the computer can understand.

 2.6  Logical Operations What RISC-V instruction does this represent? Choose from one of the four options below. funct7 rs2 rs1 funct3 rd opcode 1. sub x9, x10, x11 2. add x11, x9, x10 3. sub x11, x10, x9 4. sub x11, x9, x10 If a person is age 40ten, what is their age in hexidecimal? 2.6 Logical Operations Although the first computers operated on full words, it soon became clear that it was useful to operate on fields of bits within a word or even on individual bits. Examining characters within a word, each of which is stored as 8 bits, is one example of such an operation (see Section 2.9). It follows that operations were added to programming languages and instruction set architectures to simplify, among other things, the packing and unpacking of bits into words. These instructions are called logical operations. Figure 2.8 shows logical operations in C, Java, and RISC-V. Check Yourself “Contrariwise,” continued Tweedledee, “if it was so, it might be; and if it were so, it would be; but as it isn’t, it ain’t. That’s logic.” Lewis Carroll, Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland, 1865 FIGURE 2.8  C and Java logical operators and their corresponding RISC-V instructions. One way to implement NOT is to use XOR with one operand being all ones (FFFF FFFF FFFF FFFFhex).

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer The first class of such operations is called shifts. They move all the bits in a word to the left or right, filling the emptied bits with 0s. For example, if register x19 contained 00000000 00000000 00000000 00001001two = 9ten and the instruction to shift left by 4 was executed, the new value would be: 00000000 00000000 00000000 10010000two = 144ten The dual of a shift left is a shift right. The actual names of the two RISC-V shift instructions are shift left logical immediate (slli) and shift right logical immediate (srli). The following instruction performs the operation above, if the original value was in register x19 and the result should go in register x11: slli x11, x19, 4 // reg x11 = reg x19 << 4 bits These shift instructions use the I-type format. Since it isn’t useful to shift a 32- bit register by more than 31 bits, only the lower bits of the I-type format’s 12-bit immediate are actually used. The remaining bits are repurposed as an additional opcode field, funct7. funct7 immediate rs1 funct3 rd opcode The encoding of slli is 19 in the opcode field, rd contains 11, funct3 contains 1, rs1 contains 19, immediate contains 4, and funct6 contains 0. Shift left logical provides a bonus benefit. Shifting left by i bits gives the identical result as multiplying by 2i, just as shifting a decimal number by i digits is equivalent to multiplying by 10i. For example, the above slli shifts by 4, which gives the same result as multiplying by 24 or 16. The first bit pattern above represents 9, and 9 × 16 = 144, the value of the second bit pattern. RISC-V provides a third type of shift, shift right arithmetic (srai). This variant is similar to srli, except rather than filling the vacated bits on the left with zeros, it fills them with copies of the old sign bit. It also provides variants of all three shifts that take the shift amount from a register, rather than from an immediate: sll, srl, and sra. Another useful operation that isolates fields is AND. (We capitalize the word to avoid confusion between the operation and the English conjunction.) AND is a bit-by-bit operation that leaves a 1 in the result only if both bits of the operands are 1. For example, if register x11 contains AND  A logical bit-by- bit operation with two operands that calculates a 1 only if there is a 1 in both operands.

 2.6  Logical Operations 00000000 00000000 00001101 11000000two and register x10 contains 00000000 00000000 00111100 00000000two then, after executing the RISC-V instruction and x9, x10, x11      // reg x9 = reg x10 & reg x11 the value of register x9 would be 00000000 00000000 00001100 00000000two As you can see, AND can apply a bit pattern to a set of bits to force 0s where there is a 0 in the bit pattern. Such a bit pattern in conjunction with AND is traditionally called a mask, since the mask “conceals” some bits. To place a value into one of these seas of 0s, there is the dual to AND, called OR. It is a bit-by-bit operation that places a 1 in the result if either operand bit is a 1. To elaborate, if the registers x10 and x11 are unchanged from the preceding example, the result of the RISC-V instruction or x9, x10, x11 // reg x9 = reg x10 | reg x11 is this value in register x9: 00000000 00000000 00111101 11000000two The final logical operation is a contrarian. NOT takes one operand and places a 1 in the result if one operand bit is a 0, and vice versa. Using our prior notation, it calculates x . In keeping with the three-operand format, the designers of RISC-V decided to include the instruction XOR (exclusive OR) instead of NOT. Since exclusive OR creates a 0 when bits are the same and a 1 if they are different, the equivalent to NOT is an xor 111…111. If the register x10 is unchanged from the preceding example and register x12 has the value 0, the result of the RISC-V instruction xor x9, x10, x12 // reg x9 = reg x10 ^ reg x12 is this value in register x9: 00000000 00000000 00110001 11000000two Figure 2.8 above shows the relationship between the C and Java operators and the RISC-V instructions. Constants are useful in logical operations as well as in arithmetic operations, so RISC-V also provides the instructions and immediate (andi), or immediate (ori), and exclusive or immediate (xori). OR  A logical bit-by- bit operation with two operands that calculates a 1 if there is a 1 in either operand. NOT  A logical bit-by- bit operation with one operand that inverts the bits; that is, it replaces every 1 with a 0, and every 0 with a 1. XOR  A logical bit-by- bit operation with two operands that calculates the exclusive OR of the two operands. That is, it calculates a 1 only if the values are different in the two operands.

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer Elaboration:  C allows bit fields or fields to be defined within words, both allowing objects to be packed within a word and to match an externally enforced interface such as an I/O device. All fields must fit within a single word. Fields are unsigned integers that can be as short as 1 bit. C compilers insert and extract fields using logical instructions in RISC-V: andi, ori, slli, and srli. Which operations can isolate a field in a word? 1. AND 2. A shift left followed by a shift right conditional branch  An instruction that tests a value and that allows for a subsequent transfer of control to a new address in the program based on the outcome of the test. The utility of an automatic computer lies in the possibility of using a given sequence of instructions repeatedly, the number of times it is iterated being dependent upon the results of the computation.… This choice can be made to depend upon the sign of a number (zero being reckoned as plus for machine purposes). Consequently, we introduce an [instruction] (the conditional transfer [instruction]) which will, depending on the sign of a given number, cause the proper one of two routines to be executed. Burks, Goldstine, and von Neumann, 1946 Check Yourself 2.7 Instructions for Making Decisions What distinguishes a computer from a simple calculator is its ability to make decisions. Based on the input data and the values created during computation, different instructions execute. Decision making is commonly represented in programming languages using the if statement, sometimes combined with go to statements and labels. RISC-V assembly language includes two decision-making instructions, similar to an if statement with a go-to. The first instruction is beq rs1, rs2, L1 This instruction means go to the statement labeled L1 if the value in register rs1 equals the value in register rs2. The mnemonic beq stands for branch if equal. The second instruction is bne rs1, rs2, L1 It means go to the statement labeled L1 if the value in register rs1 does not equal the value in register rs2. The mnemonic bne stands for branch if not equal. These two instructions are traditionally called conditional branches.

 2.7  Instructions for Making Decisions Compiling if-then-else into Conditional Branches In the following code segment, f, g, h, i, and j are variables. If the five variables f through j correspond to the five registers x19 through x23, what is the compiled RISC-V code for this C if statement? if (i == j) f = g + h; else f = g − h; Figure 2.9 shows a flowchart of what the RISC-V code should do. The first expression compares for equality between two variables in registers. It would seem that we would want to branch if I and j are equal (beq). In general, the code will be more efficient if we test for the opposite condition to branch over the code that branches if the values are not equal (bne). Here is the code: bne x22, x23, Else    // go to Else if i ≠ j The next assignment statement performs a single operation, and if all the operands are allocated to registers, it is just one instruction: add x19, x20, x21        // f = g + h (skipped if i ≠ j) We now need to go to the end of the if statement. This example introduces another kind of branch, often called an unconditional branch. This instruction says that the processor always follows the branch. One way to express an unconditional branch in RISC-V is to use a conditional branch whose condition is always true: beq x0, x0, Exit        // if 0 == 0, go to Exit The assignment statement in the else portion of the if statement can again be compiled into a single instruction. We just need to append the label Else to this instruction. We also show the label Exit that is after this instruction, showing the end of the if-then-else compiled code: Else:sub x19, x20, x21    // f = g − h (skipped if i = j) Exit: Notice that the assembler relieves the compiler and the assembly language programmer from the tedium of calculating addresses for branches, just as it does for calculating data addresses for loads and stores (see Section 2.12). ANSWER EXAMPLE

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer Compilers frequently create branches and labels where they do not appear in the programming language. Avoiding the burden of writing explicit labels and branches is one benefit of writing in high-level programming languages and is a reason coding is faster at that level. Loops Decisions are important both for choosing between two alternatives—found in if statements—and for iterating a computation—found in loops. The same assembly instructions are the building blocks for both cases. Compiling a while Loop in C Here is a traditional loop in C: while  (save[i] == k)         i += 1; Assume that i and k correspond to registers x22 and x24 and the base of the array save is in x25. What is the RISC-V assembly code corresponding to this C code? The first step is to load save[i] into a temporary register. Before we can load save[i] into a temporary register, we need to have its address. Before we can add i to the base of array save to form the address, we must multiply the index i by 4 due to the byte addressing issue. Fortunately, we can use shift left, since shifting left by 2 bits multiplies by 22 or 4 (see page 96 in the prior EXAMPLE ANSWER Hardware/ Software Interface f=g+h f=g–h i=j ij i= =j? Else: Exit: FIGURE 2.9  Illustration of the options in the if statement above. The left box corresponds to the then part of the if statement, and the right box corresponds to the else part.

 2.7  Instructions for Making Decisions section). We need to add the label Loop to it so that we can branch back to that instruction at the end of the loop: Loop: slli x10, x22, 2      // Temp reg x10 = i * 4 To get the address of save[i], we need to add x10 and the base of save in x25: add x10, x10, x25        // x10 = address of save[i] Now we can use that address to load save[i] into a temporary register: lw x9, 0(x10)        // Temp reg x9 = save[i] The next instruction performs the loop test, exiting if save[i] ≠ k: bne x9, x24, Exit      // go to Exit if save[i] ≠ k The following instruction adds 1 to i: addi x22, x22, 1        // i = i + 1 The end of the loop branches back to the while test at the top of the loop. We just add the Exit label after it, and we’re done: beq x0, x0, Loop        // go to Loop Exit: (See Self Study in Section 2.25 for an optimization of this sequence.) Such sequences of instructions that end in a branch are so fundamental to compiling that they are given their own buzzword: a basic block is a sequence of instructions without branches, except possibly at the end, and without branch targets or branch labels, except possibly at the beginning. One of the first early phases of compilation is breaking the program into basic blocks. The test for equality or inequality is probably the most popular test, but there are many other relationships between two numbers. For example, a for loop may want to test to see if the index variable is less than 0. The full set of comparisons is less than (<), less than or equal (≤), greater than (>), greater than or equal (≥), equal (=), and not equal (≠). Comparison of bit patterns must also deal with the dichotomy between signed and unsigned numbers. Sometimes a bit pattern with a 1 in the most significant bit represents a negative number and, of course, is less than any positive number, which must have a 0 in the most significant bit. With unsigned integers, on the other hand, a 1 in the most significant bit represents a number that is larger than any that begins basic block  A sequence of instructions without branches (except possibly at the end) and without branch targets or branch labels (except possibly at the beginning). Hardware/ Software Interface

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer with a 0. (We’ll soon take advantage of this dual meaning of the most significant bit to reduce the cost of the array bounds checking.) RISC-V provides instructions that handle both cases. These instructions have the same form as beq and bne, but perform different comparisons. The branch if less than (blt) instruction compares the values in registers rs1 and rs2 and takes the branch if the value in rs1 is smaller, when they are treated as two’s complement numbers. Branch if greater than or equal (bge) takes the branch in the opposite case, that is, if the value in rs1 is at least the value in rs2. Branch if less than, unsigned (bltu) takes the branch if the value in rs1 is smaller than the value in rs2 when the values are treated as unsigned numbers. Finally, branch if greater than or equal, unsigned (bgeu) takes the branch in the opposite case. An alternative to providing these additional branch instructions is to set a register based upon the result of the comparison, then branch on the value in that temporary register with the beq or bne instructions. This approach, used by the MIPS instruction set, can make the processor datapath slightly simpler, but it takes more instructions to express a program. Yet another alternative, used by ARM’s instruction sets, is to keep extra bits that record what occurred during an instruction. These additional bits, called condition codes or flags, indicate, for example, if the result of an arithmetic operation was negative, or zero, or resulted in overflow. Conditional branches then use combinations of these condition codes to perform the desired test. One downside to condition codes is that if many instructions always set them, it will create dependencies that will make it difficult for pipelined execution (see Chapter 4). Bounds Check Shortcut Treating signed numbers as if they were unsigned gives us a low-cost way of checking if 0 ≤ x < y, which matches the index out-of-bounds check for arrays. The key is that negative integers in two’s complement notation look like large numbers in unsigned notation; that is, the most significant bit is a sign bit in the former notation but a large part of the number in the latter. Thus, an unsigned comparison of x < y checks if x is negative as well as if x is less than y. Use this shortcut to reduce an index-out-of-bounds check: branch to IndexOutOfBounds if x20 ≥ x11 or if x20 is negative. The checking code just uses unsigned greater than or equal to do both checks: bgeu x20, x11, IndexOutOfBounds // if x20 >= x11 or x20 < 0, goto IndexOutOfBounds EXAMPLE ANSWER

 2.7  Instructions for Making Decisions Hardware/ Software Interface Check Yourself I. C has many statements for decisions and loops, while RISC-V has few. Which of the following does or does not explain this imbalance? Why? 1. More decision statements make code easier to read and understand. 2. Fewer decision statements simplify the task of the underlying layer that is responsible for execution. 3. More decision statements mean fewer lines of code, which generally reduces coding time. 4. More decision statements mean fewer lines of code, which generally results in the execution of fewer operations. II. Why does C provide two sets of operators for AND (& and &&) and two sets of operators for OR (| and ||), while RISC-V doesn’t? 1. Logical operations AND and OR implement & and |, while conditional branches implement && and ||. 2. The previous statement has it backwards: && and || correspond to logical operations, while & and | map to conditional branches. 3. They are redundant and mean the same thing: && and || are simply inherited from the programming language B, the predecessor of C. Case/Switch Statement Most programming languages have a case or switch statement that allows the programmer to select one of many alternatives depending on a single value. The simplest way to implement switch is via a sequence of conditional tests, turning the switch statement into a chain of if-then-else statements. Sometimes the alternatives may be more efficiently encoded as a table of addresses of alternative instruction sequences, called a branch address table or branch table, and the program needs only to index into the table and then branch to the appropriate sequence. The branch table is therefore just an array of double- words containing addresses that correspond to labels in the code. The program loads the appropriate entry from the branch table into a register. It then needs to branch using the address in the register. To support such situations, computers like RISC-V include an indirect jump instruction, which performs an unconditional branch to the address specified in a register. In RISC-V, the jump-and-link register instruction (jalr) serves this purpose. We’ll see an even more popular use of this versatile instruction in the next section. Although there are many statements for decisions and loops in programming languages like C and Java, the bedrock statement that implements them at the instruction set level is the conditional branch. branch address table  Also called branch table. A table of addresses of alternative instruction sequences.

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer 2.8 Supporting Procedures in Computer Hardware A procedure or function is one tool programmers use to structure programs, both to make them easier to understand and to allow code to be reused. Procedures allow the programmer to concentrate on just one portion of the task at a time; parameters act as an interface between the procedure and the rest of the program and data, since they can pass values and return results. We describe the equivalent to procedures in Java in Section 2.15, but Java needs everything from a computer that C needs. Procedures are one way to implement abstraction in software. You can think of a procedure like a spy who leaves with a secret plan, acquires resources, performs the task, covers his or her tracks, and then returns to the point of origin with the desired result. Nothing else should be perturbed once the mission is complete. Moreover, a spy operates on only a “need to know” basis, so the spy can’t make assumptions about the spymaster. Similarly, in the execution of a procedure, the program must follow these six steps: 1. Put parameters in a place where the procedure can access them. 2. Transfer control to the procedure. 3. Acquire the storage resources needed for the procedure. 4. Perform the desired task. 5. Put the result value in a place where the calling program can access it. 6. Return control to the point of origin, since a procedure can be called from several points in a program. As mentioned above, registers are the fastest place to hold data in a computer, so we want to use them as much as possible. RISC-V software follows the following convention for procedure calling in allocating its 32 registers: n x10–x17: eight parameter registers in which to pass parameters or return values. n x1: one return address register to return to the point of origin. In addition to allocating these registers, RISC-V assembly language includes an instruction just for the procedures: it branches to an address and simultaneously saves the address of the following instruction to the destination register rd. The jump-and-link instruction (jal) is written jal x1, ProcedureAddress        // jump to ProcedureAddress and write return address to x1 procedure  A stored subroutine that performs a specific task based on the parameters with which it is provided. jump-and-link instruction  An instruction that branches to an address and simultaneously saves the address of the following instruction in a register (usually x1 in RISC-V).

 2.8  Supporting Procedures in Computer Hardware The link portion of the name means that an address or link is formed that points to the calling site to allow the procedure to return to the proper address. This “link,” stored in register x1, is called the return address. The return address is needed because the same procedure could be called from several parts of the program. To support the return from a procedure, computers like RISC-V use an indirect jump, like the jump-and-link instruction (jalr) introduced above to help with case statements: jalr x0,  0(x1) The jump-and-link register instruction branches to the address stored in register x1—which is just what we want. Thus, the calling program, or caller, puts the parameter values in x10–x17 and uses jal x1, X to branch to procedure X (sometimes named the callee). The callee then performs the calculations, places the results in the same parameter registers, and returns control to the caller using jalr x0, 0(x1). Implicit in the stored-program idea is the need to have a register to hold the address of the current instruction being executed. For historical reasons, this register is almost always called the program counter, abbreviated PC in the RISC-V architecture, although a more sensible name would have been instruction address register. The jal instruction actually saves PC + 4 in its designation register (usually x1) to link to the byte address of the following instruction to set up the procedure return. Elaboration:  The jump-and-link instruction can also be used to perform an unconditional branch within a procedure by using x0 as the destination register. Since x0 is hard-wired to zero, the effect is to discard the return address: jal x0, Label  // unconditionally branch to Label Using More Registers Suppose a compiler needs more registers for a procedure than the eight argument registers. Since we must cover our tracks after our mission is complete, any registers needed by the caller must be restored to the values that they contained before the procedure was invoked. This situation is an example in which we need to spill registers to memory, as mentioned in the Hardware/Software Interface section on page 75. The ideal data structure for spilling registers is a stack—a last-in-first-out queue. A stack needs a pointer to the most recently allocated address in the stack to show where the next procedure should place the registers to be spilled or where old register values are found. In RISC-V, the stack pointer is register x2, also known by the name sp. The stack pointer is adjusted by one word for each register that is saved or restored. Stacks are so popular that they have their own buzzwords for transferring data to and from the stack: placing data onto the stack is called a push, and removing data from the stack is called a pop. return address  A link to the calling site that allows a procedure to return to the proper address; in RISC-V it is stored in register x1. caller  The program that instigates a procedure and provides the necessary parameter values. callee  A procedure that executes a series of stored instructions based on parameters provided by the caller and then returns control to the caller. program counter (PC)  The register containing the address of the instruction in the program being executed. stack  A data structure for spilling registers organized as a last-in- first-out queue. stack pointer  A value denoting the most recently allocated address in a stack that shows where registers should be spilled or where old register values can be found. In RISC-V, it is register sp, or x2. push  Add element to stack. pop  Remove element from stack.

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer By historical precedent, stacks “grow” from higher addresses to lower addresses. This convention means that you push values onto the stack by subtracting from the stack pointer. Adding to the stack pointer shrinks the stack, thereby popping values off the stack. Compiling a C Procedure That Doesn’t Call Another Procedure Let’s turn the example on page 72 from Section 2.2 into a C procedure: int leaf_example (int g, int h, int i, int j) {         int f;         f = (g + h) − (i + j);         return f; } What is the compiled RISC-V assembly code? The parameter variables g, h, i, and j correspond to the argument registers x10, x11, x12, and x13, respectively, and f corresponds to x20. The compiled program starts with the label of the procedure: leaf_example: The next step is to save the registers used by the procedure. The C assignment statement in the procedure body is identical to the example on page 73, which uses two temporary registers (x5 and x6). Thus, we need to save three registers: x5, x6, and x20. We “push” the old values onto the stack by creating space for three words (12 bytes) on the stack and then store them: addi sp, sp, -12      // adjust stack to make room for 3 items sw x5, 8(sp)       // save register x5 for use afterwards sw x6, 4(sp)     // save register x6 for use afterwards sw x20, 0(sp)      // save register x20 for use afterwards Figure 2.10 shows the stack before, during, and after the procedure call. The next three statements correspond to the body of the procedure, which follows the example on page 73: add x5, x10, x11 // register x5 contains g + h add x6, x12, x13 // register x6 contains i + j sub x20, x5, x6 // f = x5 − x6, which is (g + h) − (i + j) EXAMPLE ANSWER

 2.8  Supporting Procedures in Computer Hardware To return the value of f, we copy it into a parameter register: addi x10, x20, 0 // returns f (x10 = x20 + 0) Before returning, we restore the three old values of the registers we saved by “popping” them from the stack: lw x20, 0(sp)   // restore register x20 for caller lw x6, 4(sp)   // restore register x6 for caller lw x5, 8(sp) // restore register x5 for caller addi sp, sp, 12  // adjust stack to delete 3 items The procedure ends with a branch register using the return address: jalr x0, 0(x1)        // branch back to calling routine In the previous example, we used temporary registers and assumed their old values must be saved and restored. To avoid saving and restoring a register whose value is never used, which might happen with a temporary register, RISC-V software separates 19 of the registers into two groups: n x5−x7 and x28−x31: temporary registers that are not preserved by the callee (called procedure) on a procedure call n x8−x9 and x18−x27: saved registers that must be preserved on a procedure call (if used, the callee saves and restores them) This simple convention reduces register spilling. In the example above, since the caller does not expect registers x5 and x6 to be preserved across a procedure call, High address Low address Contents of register x5 Contents of register x6 Contents of register x20 SP SP SP (a) (b) (c) FIGURE 2.10  The values of the stack pointer and the stack (a) before, (b) during, and (c) after the procedure call. The stack pointer always points to the “top” of the stack, or the last word in the stack in this drawing.

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer we can drop two stores and two loads from the code. We still must save and restore x20, since the callee must assume that the caller needs its value. Nested Procedures Procedures that do not call others are called leaf procedures. Life would be simple if all procedures were leaf procedures, but they aren’t. Just as a spy might employ other spies as part of a mission, who in turn might use even more spies, so do procedures invoke other procedures. Moreover, recursive procedures even invoke “clones” of themselves. Just as we need to be careful when using registers in procedures, attention must be paid when invoking nonleaf procedures. For example, suppose that the main program calls procedure A with an argument of 3, by placing the value 3 into register x10 and then using jal x1, A. Then suppose that procedure A calls procedure B via jal x1, B with an argument of 7, also placed in x10. Since A hasn’t finished its task yet, there is a conflict over the use of register x10. Similarly, there is a conflict over the return address in register x1, since it now has the return address for B. Unless we take steps to prevent the problem, this conflict will eliminate procedure A’s ability to return to its caller. One solution is to push all the other registers that must be preserved on the stack, just as we did with the saved registers. The caller pushes any argument registers (x10–x17) or temporary registers (x5-x7 and x28-x31) that are needed after the call. The callee pushes the return address register x1 and any saved registers (x8- x9 and x18-x27) used by the callee. The stack pointer sp is adjusted to account for the number of registers placed on the stack. Upon the return, the registers are restored from memory, and the stack pointer is readjusted. Compiling a Recursive C Procedure, Showing Nested Procedure Linking Let’s tackle a recursive procedure that calculates factorial: int fact (int n) {     if (n < 1) return (1);         else return (n * fact(n − 1)); } What is the RISC-V assembly code? The parameter variable n corresponds to the argument register x10. The compiled program starts with the label of the procedure and then saves two registers on the stack, the return address and x10: fact: EXAMPLE ANSWER

 2.8  Supporting Procedures in Computer Hardware      addi sp, sp, -8 // adjust stack for 2 items        sw x1, 4(sp) // save the return address        sw x10, 0(sp) // save the argument n The first time fact is called, sw saves an address in the program that called fact. The next two instructions test whether n is less than 1, going to L1 if n ≥ 1. addi     x5, x10, -1  // x5 = n - 1 bge      x5, x0, L1    // if (n - 1) >= 0, go to L1 If n is less than 1, fact returns 1 by putting 1 into a value register: it adds 1 to 0 and places that sum in x10. It then pops the two saved values off the stack and branches to the return address: addi    x10, x0, 1 // return 1 addi    sp, sp, 8 // pop 2 items off stack jalr    x0, 0(x1) // return to caller Before popping two items off the stack, we could have loaded x1 and x10. Since x1 and x10 don’t change when n is less than 1, we skip those instructions. If n is not less than 1, the argument n is decremented and then fact is called again with the decremented value: L1: addi x10, x10, -1  // n >= 1: argument gets (n − 1)     jal x1, fact  // call fact with (n − 1) The next instruction is where fact returns; its result is in x10 . Now the old return address and old argument are restored, along with the stack pointer: addi  x6, x10, 0  // return from jal: move result of fact (n - 1) to x6: lw  x10, 0(sp)  // restore argument n lw  x1, 4(sp)  // restore the return address addi  sp, sp, 8  // adjust stack pointer to pop 2 items Next, argument register x10 gets the product of the old argument and the result of fact(n - 1), now in x6. We assume a multiply instruction is available, even though it is not covered until Chapter 3: mul      x10, x10, x6      // return n * fact (n − 1) Finally, fact branches again to the return address: jalr      x0, 0(x1)      // return to the caller

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer A C variable is generally a location in storage, and its interpretation depends both on its type and storage class. Example types include integers and characters (see Section 2.9). C has two storage classes: automatic and static. Automatic variables are local to a procedure and are discarded when the procedure exits. Static variables exist across exits from and entries to procedures. C variables declared outside all procedures are considered static, as are any variables declared using the keyword static. The rest are automatic. To simplify access to static data, some RISC-V compilers reserve a register x3 for use as the global pointer, or gp. Figure 2.11 summarizes what is preserved across a procedure call. Note that several schemes preserve the stack, guaranteeing that the caller will get the same data back on a load from the stack as it stored onto the stack. The stack above sp is preserved simply by making sure the callee does not write above sp; sp is itself preserved by the callee adding exactly the same amount that was subtracted from it; and the other registers are preserved by saving them on the stack (if they are used) and restoring them from there. global pointer  The register that is reserved to point to the static area. frame pointer  A value denoting the location of the saved registers and local variables for a given procedure. Hardware/ Software Interface FIGURE 2.11  What is and what is not preserved across a procedure call. If the software relies on the global pointer register, discussed in the following subsections, it is also preserved. Allocating Space for New Data on the Stack The final complexity is that the stack is also used to store variables that are local to the procedure but do not fit in registers, such as local arrays or structures. The segment of the stack containing a procedure’s saved registers and local variables is called a procedure frame or activation record. Figure 2.12 shows the state of the stack before, during, and after the procedure call. Some RISC-V compilers use a frame pointer fp, or register x8 to point to the first word of the frame of a procedure. A stack pointer might change during the procedure, and so references to a local variable in memory might have different offsets depending on where they are in the procedure, making the procedure harder to understand. Alternatively, a frame pointer offers a stable base register within a procedure for local memory-references. Note that an activation record procedure frame  Also called activation record. The segment of the stack containing a procedure’s saved registers and local variables.

 2.8  Supporting Procedures in Computer Hardware appears on the stack whether or not an explicit frame pointer is used. We’ve been avoiding using fp by avoiding changes to sp within a procedure: in our examples, the stack is adjusted only on entry to and exit from the procedure. Allocating Space for New Data on the Heap In addition to automatic variables that are local to procedures, C programmers need space in memory for static variables and for dynamic data structures. Figure 2.13 shows the RISC-V convention for allocation of memory when running the Linux operating system. The stack starts in the high end of the user addresses space (see Chapter 5) and grows down. The first part of the low end of memory is reserved, followed by the home of the RISC-V machine code, traditionally called the text segment. Above the code is the static data segment, which is the place for constants and other static variables. Although arrays tend to be a fixed length and thus are a good match to the static data segment, data structures like linked lists tend to grow and shrink during their lifetimes. The segment for such data structures is traditionally called the heap, and it is placed next in memory. Note that this allocation allows the stack and heap to grow toward each other, thereby allowing the efficient use of memory as the two segments wax and wane. text segment  The segment of a UNIX object file that contains the machine language code for routines in the source file. High address Low address (a) (b) (c) Saved argument registers (if any) SP SP SP FP FP FP Saved return address Saved saved registers (if any) Local arrays and structures (if any) FIGURE 2.12  Illustration of the stack allocation (a) before, (b) during, and (c) after the procedure call. The frame pointer (fp or x8) points to the first word of the frame, often a saved argument register, and the stack pointer (sp) points to the top of the stack. The stack is adjusted to make room for all the saved registers and any memory-resident local variables. Since the stack pointer may change during program execution, it’s easier for programmers to reference variables via the stable frame pointer, although it could be done just with the stack pointer and a little address arithmetic. If there are no local variables on the stack within a procedure, the compiler will save time by not setting and restoring the frame pointer. When a frame pointer is used, it is initialized using the address in sp on a call, and sp is restored using fp. This information is also found in Column 4 of the RISC-V Reference Data Card at the front of this book.

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer C allocates and frees space on the heap with explicit functions. malloc() allocates space on the heap and returns a pointer to it, and free() releases space on the heap to which the pointer points. C programs control memory allocation, which is the source of many common and difficult bugs. Forgetting to free space leads to a “memory leak,” which ultimately uses up so much memory that the operating system may crash. Freeing space too early leads to “dangling pointers,” which can cause pointers to point to things that the program never intended. Java uses automatic memory allocation and garbage collection primarily to avoid such bugs. Figure 2.14 summarizes the register conventions for the RISC-V assembly language. This convention is another example of making the common case fast: most procedures can be satisfied with up to eight argument registers, twelve saved registers, and seven temporary registers without ever going to memory. Elaboration:  What if there are more than eight parameters? The RISC-V convention is to place the extra parameters on the stack just above the frame pointer. The procedure then expects the first eight parameters to be in registers x10 through x17 and the rest in memory, addressable via the frame pointer. As mentioned in the caption of Figure 2.12, the frame pointer is convenient because all references to variables in the stack within a procedure will have the same offset. The frame pointer is not necessary, however. The RISC-V C compiler only uses a frame pointer in procedures that change the stack pointer in the body of the procedure. FIGURE 2.13  The RISC-V memory allocation for program and data. These addresses are only a software convention, and not part of the RISC-V architecture. The stack pointer is initialized to 0000 003f ffff fff0hex and grows down toward the data segment. At the other end, the program code (“text”) starts at 0000 0000 0040 0000hex. The static data starts immediately after the end of the text segment; in this example, we assume that address is 0000 0000 1000 0000hex. Dynamic data, allocated by malloc in C and by new in Java, is next. It grows up toward the stack in an area called the heap. This information is also found in Column 4 of the RISC-V Reference Data Card at the front of this book. Stack Dynamic data Static data Text Reserved SP 0000 003f ffff fff0hex 0000 0000 1000 0000hex PC 0000 0000 0040 0000hex

 2.8  Supporting Procedures in Computer Hardware Elaboration:  Some recursive procedures can be implemented iteratively without using recursion. Iteration can significantly improve performance by removing the overhead associated with recursive procedure calls. For example, consider a procedure used to accumulate a sum: int sum (int n, int acc) {       if (n > 0)             return sum(n − 1, acc + n);       else             return acc; } Consider the procedure call sum(3,0). This will result in recursive calls to sum(2,3), sum(1,5), and sum(0,6), and then the result 6 will be returned four times. This recursive call of sum is referred to as a tail call, and this example use of tail recursion can be implemented very efficiently (assume x10 = n, x11 = acc, and the result goes into x12): sum: ble x10, x0, sum_exit   // go to sum_exit if n <= 0       add x11, x11, x10        // add n to acc       addi x10, x10, -1          // subtract 1 from n       jal x0, sum                 // jump to sum sum_exit:       addi x12, x11, 0           // return value acc       jalr x0, 0(x1)             // return to caller FIGURE 2.14  RISC-V register conventions. This information is also found in Column 2 of the RISC-V Reference Data Card at the front of this book.

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer Which of the following statements about C and Java is generally true? 1. C programmers manage data explicitly, while it’s automatic in Java. 2. C leads to more pointer bugs and memory leak bugs than does Java. 2.9 Communicating with People Computers were invented to crunch numbers, but as soon as they became commercially viable they were used to process text. Most computers today offer 8-bit bytes to represent characters, with the American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII) being the representation that nearly everyone follows. Figure 2.15 summarizes ASCII. Check Yourself FIGURE 2.15  ASCII representation of characters. Note that upper- and lowercase letters differ by exactly 32; this observation can lead to shortcuts in checking or changing upper- and lowercase. Values not shown include formatting characters. For example, 8 represents a backspace, 9 represents a tab character, and 13 represents a carriage return. Another useful value is 0 for null, the value the programming language C uses to mark the end of a string. !(@ | = > (wow open tab at bar is great) Fourth line of the keyboard poem “Hatless Atlas,” 1991 (some give names to ASCII characters: “!” is “wow,” “(” is open, “|” is bar, and so on).

 2.9  Communicating with People ASCII versus Binary Numbers We could represent numbers as strings of ASCII digits instead of as integers. How much does storage increase if the number 1 billion is represented in ASCII versus a 32-bit integer? One billion is 1,000,000,000, so it would take 10 ASCII digits, each 8 bits long. Thus the storage expansion would be (10 × 8)/32 or 2.5. Beyond the expansion in storage, the hardware to add, subtract, multiply, and divide such decimal numbers is difficult and would consume more energy. Such difficulties explain why computing professionals are raised to believe that binary is natural and that the occasional decimal computer is bizarre. A series of instructions can extract a byte from a word, so load register and store register are sufficient for transferring bytes as well as words. Because of the popularity of text in some programs, however, RISC-V provides instructions to move bytes. Load byte unsigned (lbu) loads a byte from memory, placing it in the rightmost 8 bits of a register. Store byte (sb) takes a byte from the rightmost 8 bits of a register and writes it to memory. Thus, we copy a byte with the sequence lbu x12, 0(x10)    // Read byte from source sb x12, 0(x11)    // Write byte to destination Characters are normally combined into strings, which have a variable number of characters. There are three choices for representing a string: (1) the first position of the string is reserved to give the length of a string, (2) an accompanying variable has the length of the string (as in a structure), or (3) the last position of a string is indicated by a character used to mark the end of a string. C uses the third choice, terminating a string with a byte whose value is 0 (named null in ASCII). Thus, the string “Cal” is represented in C by the following 4 bytes, shown as decimal numbers: 67, 97, 108, and 0. (As we shall see, Java uses the first option.) EXAMPLE ANSWER

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer Compiling a String Copy Procedure, Showing How to Use C Strings The procedure strcpy copies string y to string x using the null byte termination convention of C: void strcpy (char x[], char y[]) {     size_t i;     i = 0;       while ((x[i] = y[i]) != ‘\0’) /* copy & test byte */         i += 1; } What is the RISC-V assembly code? Below is the basic RISC-V assembly code segment. Assume that base addresses for arrays x and y are found in x10 and x11, while i is in x19. strcpy adjusts the stack pointer and then saves the saved register x19 on the stack: strcpy:      addi  sp, sp, -4      // adjust stack for 1 more item      sw    x19, 0(sp)      // save x19 To initialize i to 0, the next instruction sets x19 to 0 by adding 0 to 0 and placing that sum in x19: add  x19, x0, x0 // i = 0+0 This is the beginning of the loop. The address of y[i] is first formed by adding i to y[]: L1: add  x5, x19, x11  // address of y[i] in x5 Note that we don’t have to multiply i by 4 since y is an array of bytes and not of words, as in prior examples. Load byte (lb) sign extends the byte while load byte unsigned (lbu) zero extends it. To load the character in y[i], we use load byte unsigned, which puts the character into x6: lbu  x6, 0(x5)  // x6 = y[i] EXAMPLE ANSWER

 2.9  Communicating with People A similar address calculation puts the address of x[i] in x7, and then the character in x6 is stored at that address. add     x7, x19, x10    // address of x[i] in x7 sb    x6, 0(x7)        // x[i] = y[i] Next, we exit the loop if the character was 0. That is, we exit if it is the last character of the string: beq x6, x0, L2 If not, we increment i and loop back: addi  x19, x19, 1  // i = i + 1 jal     x0, L1        // go to L1 If we don’t loop back, it was the last character of the string; we restore x19 and the stack pointer, and then return. L2: lw      x19, 0(sp)    // restore old x19         addi    sp, sp, 4        // pop 1 word off stack      jalr    x0, 0(x1)    // return String copies usually use pointers instead of arrays in C to avoid the operations on i in the code above. See Section 2.14 for an explanation of arrays versus pointers. Since the procedure strcpy above is a leaf procedure, the compiler could allocate i to a temporary register and avoid saving and restoring x19. Hence, instead of thinking of these registers as being just for temporaries, we can think of them as registers that the callee should use whenever convenient. When a compiler finds a leaf procedure, it exhausts all temporary registers before using registers it must save. Characters and Strings in Java Unicode is a universal encoding of the alphabets of most human languages. Figure 2.16 gives a list of Unicode alphabets; there are almost as many alphabets in Unicode as there are useful symbols in ASCII. To be more inclusive, Java uses Unicode for characters. By default, it uses 16 bits to represent a character.

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer The RISC-V instruction set has explicit instructions to load and store such 16- bit quantities, called halfwords. Load half unsigned loads a halfword from memory, placing it in the rightmost 16 bits of a register, filling the leftmost 16 bits with zeros. Like load byte, load half (lh) treats the halfword as a signed number and thus sign-extends to fill the 16 leftmost bits of the register. Store half (sh) takes a halfword from the rightmost 16 bits of a register and writes it to memory. We copy a halfword with the sequence lhu x19, 0(x10) // Read halfword (16 bits) from source sh x19, 0(x11) // Write halfword (16 bits) to dest Strings are a standard Java class with special built-in support and predefined methods for concatenation, comparison, and conversion. Unlike C, Java includes a word that gives the length of the string, similar to Java arrays. Elaboration:  RISC-V software is required to keep the stack aligned to “quadword” (16 byte) addresses to get better performance. This convention means that a char variable allocated on the stack may occupy as much as 16 bytes, even though it needs less. However, a C string variable or an array of bytes will pack 16 bytes per quadword, and a Java string variable or array of shorts packs 8 halfwords per quadword. FIGURE 2.16  Example alphabets in Unicode. Unicode version 4.0 has more than 160 “blocks,” which is their name for a collection of symbols. Each block is a multiple of 16. For example, Greek starts at 0370hex, and Cyrillic at 0400hex. The first three columns show 48 blocks that correspond to human languages in roughly Unicode numerical order. The last column has 16 blocks that are multilingual and are not in order. A 16-bit encoding, called UTF-16, is the default. A variable-length encoding, called UTF-8, keeps the ASCII subset as eight bits and uses 16 or 32 bits for the other characters. UTF-32 uses 32 bits per character. New Unicode versions are released every June, with version 13.0 in 2020. Versions 9.0 to 13.0 added various Emojis, while earlier versions added new language blocks and hieroglyphs. The total is almost 150,000 characters. To learn more, see www.unicode.org. Latin Malayalam Tagbanwa General Punctuation Greek Sinhala Khmer Spacing Modiﬁer Letters Cyrillic Thai Mongolian Currency Symbols Armenian Lao Limbu Combining Diacritical Marks Hebrew Tibetan Tai Le Combining Marks for Symbols Arabic Myanmar Kangxi Radicals Superscripts and Subscripts Syriac Georgian Hiragana Number Forms Thaana Hangul Jamo Katakana Mathematical Operators Devanagari Ethiopic Bopomofo Mathematical Alphanumeric Symbols Bengali Cherokee Kanbun Braille Patterns Gurmukhi Uniﬁed Canadian Aboriginal Syllabic Shavian Optical Character Recognition Gujarati Ogham Osmanya Byzantine Musical Symbols Oriya Runic Cypriot Syllabary Musical Symbols Tamil Tagalog Tai Xuan Jing Symbols Arrows Telugu Hanunoo Yijing Hexagram Symbols Box Drawing Kannada Buhid Aegean Numbers Geometric Shapes

 2.9  Communicating with People Elaboration:  Reflecting the international nature of the web, most web pages today use Unicode instead of ASCII. Hence, Unicode may be even more popular than ASCII today. I. Which of the following statements about characters and strings in C and Java is true? 1. A string in C takes about half the memory as the same string in Java. 2. Strings are just an informal name for single-dimension arrays of characters in C and Java. 3. Strings in C and Java use null (0) to mark the end of a string. 4. Operations on strings, like length, are faster in C than in Java. II. Which type of variable that can contain 1,000,000,000ten takes the most memory space? 1. int in C 2. string in C 3. string in Java Check Yourself The BIG Picture Newcomers to computing are surprised that the type of the data is not encoded inside the data but instead in the program that operates on that data. As an analogy, what does the word “won” mean? You can’t answer that question without knowing the context, specifically the language it is supposed to be in. Here are four alternatives: 1. In English, it is the verb that is the past tense of win. 2. In Korean, it is a noun that is the monetary unit of South Korea. 3. In Polish, it is an adjective that means nice-smelling. 4. In Russian, it is an adjective that means stinks. A binary number can also represent several types of data. For example, the 32-bit pattern 01100010 01100001 01010000 00000000 could represent: 1. 1,650,544,640 if the program treats it as an unsigned integer. 2. +1,650,544,640 if the program treats it as a signed integer. 3. “baP” if the program treats it as a null-terminated ASCII string. 4. The color dark blue if the program treats the bit pattern as a mixture of the four base colors cyan, magenta, yellow, and black of the Pantone color-matching system.

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer The Big Picture on page 94 reminds us that instructions are also represented as numbers, so the bit pattern could represent the MIPS machine language instruction that corresponds to the assembly language instruction multiply (see Chapter 3): mult $t2, $s3, $at If you accidentally give a word-processing program an image, it will try to interpret it as text and you will see bizarre images on the screen. You will get into similar problems if you give text data to a graphics display program. This unrestricted behavior is why file systems have a naming convention of the suffix giving the type of file (e.g., .jpg, .pdf, or .txt) to enable the program to check for mismatches by file name to reduce the occurrence of such embarrassing scenarios. 2.10 RISC-V Addressing for Wide Immediates and Addresses Although keeping all RISC-V instructions 32 bits long simplifies the hardware, there are times where it would be convenient to have 32-bit or larger constants or addresses. This section starts with the general solution for large constants, and then shows the optimizations for instruction addresses used in branches. Wide Immediate Operands Although constants are frequently short and fit into the 12-bit fields, sometimes they are bigger. The RISC-V instruction set includes the instruction Load upper immediate (lui) to load a 20-bit constant into bits 12 through 31 of a register. The rightmost 12 bits are filled with zeros. This instruction allows, for example, a 32-bit constant to be created with two instructions. lui uses a new instruction format, U-type, as the other formats cannot accommodate such a large constant. Loading a 32-Bit Constant What is the RISC-V assembly code to load this 32-bit constant into register x19? 00000000 00111101 00000101 00000000 EXAMPLE

 2.10  RISC-V Addressing for Wide Immediates and Addresses First, we would load bits 12 through 31 with that bit pattern, which is 976 in decimal, using lui: lui    x19, 976 // 976decimal = 0000 0000 0011 1101 0000 The value of register x19 afterward is: 00000000 00111101 00000000 00000000 The next step is to add in the lowest 12 bits, whose decimal value is 1280: addi    x19, x19, 1280 // 1280decimal = 00000101 00000000 The final value in register x19 is the desired value: 00000000 00111101 00000101 00000000 Addressing in Branches The RISC-V branch instructions use an RISC-V instruction format with a 12-bit immediate. This format can represent branch addresses from −4096 to 4094, in multiples of 2. For reasons revealed shortly, it is only possible to branch to even addresses. The SB-type format consists of a 7-bit opcode, a 3-bit function code, two 5-bit register operands (rs1 and rs2), and a 12-bit address immediate. The address uses an unusual encoding, which simplifies datapath design but complicates assembly. The instruction bne  x10, x11, 2000  // if x10 != x11, go to location 2000ten = 0111 1101 0000 ANSWER Elaboration:  In the previous example, bit 11 of the constant was 0. If bit 11 had been set, there would have been an additional complication: the 12-bit immediate is sign-extended, so the addend would have been negative. This means that in addition to adding in the rightmost 11 bits of the constant, we would have also subtracted 212. To compensate for this error, it suffices to add 1 to the constant loaded with lui, since the lui constant is scaled by 212. Either the compiler or the assembler must break large constants into pieces and then reassemble them into a register. As you might expect, the immediate field’s size restriction may be a problem for memory addresses in loads and stores as well as for constants in immediate instructions. Hence, the symbolic representation of the RISC-V machine language is no longer limited by the hardware, but by whatever the creator of an assembler chooses to include (see Section 2.12). We stick close to the hardware to explain the architecture of the computer, noting when we use the enhanced language of the assembler that is not found in the processor. Hardware/ Software Interface

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer could be assembled into the S format (it’s actually a bit more complicated, as we will see in Section 4.4): imm[12:6] rs2 rs1 funct3 imm[5:1] opcode where the opcode for conditional branches is 1100111two and bne’s funct3 code is 001two. The unconditional jump-and-link instruction (jal) uses an instruction format with a 12-bit immediate. This instruction consists of a 7-bit opcode, a 5-bit destination register operand (rd), and a 20-bit address immediate. The link address, which is the address of the instruction following the jal, is written to rd. Like the SB-type format, the UJ-type format’s address operand uses an unusual immediate encoding, and it cannot encode odd addresses. So, jal  x0, 2000  // go to location 2000ten = 0111 1101 0000 could be assembled into the U format (Section 4.4 will show the actual format for jal): imm[20:1] rd opcode If addresses of the program had to fit in this 20-bit field, it would mean that no program could be bigger than 220, which is far too small to be a realistic option today. An alternative would be to specify a register that would always be added to the branch offset, so that a branch instruction would calculate the following: Program counter Register Branch offset   This sum allows the program to be as large as 232 and still be able to use conditional branches, solving the branch address size problem. Then the question is, which register? The answer comes from seeing how conditional branches are used. Conditional branches are found in loops and in if statements, so they tend to branch to a nearby instruction. For example, about half of all conditional branches in SPEC benchmarks go to locations less than 16 instructions away. Since the program counter (PC) contains the address of the current instruction, we can branch within ±210 words of the current instruction, or jump within ±218 words of the current instruction, if we use the PC as the register to be added to the address. Almost all loops and if statements are smaller than 210 words, so the PC is the ideal choice. This form of branch addressing is called PC-relative addressing. PC-relative addressing  An addressing regime in which the address is the sum of the program counter (PC) and a constant in the instruction.

 2.10  RISC-V Addressing for Wide Immediates and Addresses Like most recent computers, RISC-V uses PC-relative addressing for both conditional branches and unconditional jumps, because the destination of these instructions is likely to be close to the branch. On the other hand, procedure calls may require jumping more than 218 words away, since there is no guarantee that the callee is close to the caller. Hence, RISC-V allows very long jumps to any 32- bit address with a two-instruction sequence: lui writes bits 12 through 31 of the address to a temporary register, and jalr adds the lower 12 bits of the address to the temporary register and jumps to the sum. Since RISC-V instructions are 4 bytes long, the RISC-V branch instructions could have been designed to stretch their reach by having the PC-relative address refer to the number of words between the branch and the target instruction, rather than the number of bytes. However, the RISC-V architects wanted to support the possibility of instructions that are only 2 bytes long, so the branch instructions represent the number of halfwords between the branch and the branch target. Thus, the 20-bit address field in the jal instruction can encode a distance of ±219 halfwords, or ±1 MiB from the current PC. Similarly, the 12-bit field in the conditional branch instructions is also a halfword address, meaning that it represents a 13-bit byte address. Showing Branch Offset in Machine Language The while loop on page 100 was compiled into this RISC-V assembler code: Loop:slli x10, x22, 2       // Temp reg x10 = i * 4 add x10, x10, x25 // x10 = address of save[i] lw x9, 0(x10) // Temp reg x9 = save[i] bne x9, x24, Exit // go to Exit if save[i] != k addi x22, x22, 1 // i = i + 1 beq x0, x0, Loop // go to Loop Exit: If we assume we place the loop starting at location 80000 in memory, what is the RISC-V machine code for this loop? The assembled instructions and their addresses are: Address Instruction EXAMPLE ANSWER

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer Branching Far Away Given a branch on register x10 being equal to zero, beq    x10, x0, L1 replace it by a pair of instructions that offers a much greater branching distance. These instructions replace the short-address conditional branch:       bne          x10, x0, L2         jal         x0, L1 L2: Most conditional branches are to a nearby location, but occasionally they branch far away, farther than can be represented in the 12-bit address in the conditional branch instruction. The assembler comes to the rescue just as it did with large addresses or constants: it inserts an unconditional branch to the branch target, and inverts the condition so that the conditional branch decides whether to skip the unconditional branch. Hardware/ Software Interface EXAMPLE ANSWER Remember that RISC-V instructions have byte addresses, so addresses of sequential words differ by 4. The bne instruction on the fourth line adds 3 words or 12 bytes to the address of the instruction, specifying the branch destination relative to the branch instruction (12 + 80012) and not using the full destination address (80024). The branch instruction on the last line does a similar calculation for a backwards branch (−20 + 80020), corresponding to the label Loop. Elaboration:  In Chapters 2 and 3, we pretend that branches and jumps use S and U formats for pedagogical reasons. Conditional branch and unconditional jumps use formats match the lengths and functions of the fields in the S and U types—called SB and UJ—but the bits are swirled around. The rationale for SB and UJ makes more sense once you understand hardware, as Chapter 4 explains. SB and UJ simplify the hardware but give the assembler (and your author) a little more to do. Figures 4.17 and 4.18 show the hardware savings.

 2.10  RISC-V Addressing for Wide Immediates and Addresses RISC-V Addressing Mode Summary Multiple forms of addressing are generically called addressing modes. Figure 2.17 shows how operands are identified for each addressing mode. The addressing modes of the RISC-V instructions are the following: 1. Immediate addressing, where the operand is a constant within the instruction itself. 2. Register addressing, where the operand is a register. 3. Base or displacement addressing, where the operand is at the memory location whose address is the sum of a register and a constant in the instruction. 4. PC-relative addressing, where the branch address is the sum of the PC and a constant in the instruction. addressing mode  One of several addressing regimes delimited by their varied use of operands and/or addresses. FIGURE 2.17  Illustration of four RISC-V addressing modes. The operands are shaded in color. The operand of mode 3 is in memory, whereas the operand for mode 2 is a register. Note that versions of load and store access bytes, halfwords, words. For mode 1, the operand is part of the instruction itself. Mode 4 addresses instructions in memory, with mode 4 adding a long address to the PC. Note that a single operation can use more than one addressing mode. Add, for example, uses both immediate (addi) and register (add) addressing. 1. Immediate addressing 2. Register addressing 3. Base addressing 4. PC-relative addressing funct7 rs2 funct3 op Register Registers + Register word Memory Halfword Byte Word Memory PC rs1 rd immediate funct3 op rs1 rd immediate funct3 op rs1 rd funct3 op rs1 imm imm rs2 +

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer FIGURE 2.18  RISC-V instruction encoding. All instructions have an opcode field, and all formats except U-type use the funct3 field. R-type instructions use the funct7 field, and immediate shifts (slli, srli, srai) use the funct6 field. Decoding Machine Language Sometimes you are forced to reverse-engineer machine language to create the original assembly language. One example is when looking at “core dump.” Figure 2.18 shows the RISC-V encoding of the opcodes for the RISC-V machine language. This figure helps when translating by hand between assembly language and machine language.

 2.10  RISC-V Addressing for Wide Immediates and Addresses Decoding Machine Code What is the assembly language statement corresponding to this machine instruction? 00578833hex The first step is converting hexadecimal to binary: 0000 0000 0101 0111 1000 1000 0011 0011 To know how to interpret the bits, we need to determine the instruction format, and to do that we first need to determine the opcode. The opcode is the rightmost 7 bits, or 0110011. Searching Figure 2.20 for this value, we see that the opcode corresponds to the R-type arithmetic instructions. Thus, we can parse the binary format into fields listed in Figure 2.21: funct7 rs2 rs1 funct3 rd opcode We decode the rest of the instruction by looking at the field values. The funct7 and funct3 fields are both zero, indicating the instruction is add. The decimal values for the register operands are 5 for the rs2 field, 15 for rs1, and 16 for rd. These numbers represent registers x5, x15, and x16. Now we can reveal the assembly instruction: add x16, x15, x5 Figure 2.19 shows all the RISC-V instruction formats. Figure 2.1 on pages 70–71 shows the RISC-V assembly language revealed in this chapter. The next chapter covers RISC-V instructions for multiply, divide, and arithmetic for real numbers. FIGURE 2.19  Four RISC-V instruction formats. Figure 4.14.6 reveals the missing RISC-V formats for conditional branch (SB) and unconditional jumps (UJ), whose formats match the lengths of the fields in the S and U types, but the bits are swirled around. The rationale for SB and UJ makes more sense once you have an understanding of hardware given in Chapter 4, as SB and UJ simplify the hardware but give the assembler a little more to do. EXAMPLE ANSWER

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer 2.11 Parallelism and Instructions: Synchronization Parallel execution is easier when tasks are independent, but often they need to cooperate. Cooperation usually means some tasks are writing new values that others must read. To know when a task is finished writing so that it is safe for another to read, the tasks need to synchronize. If they don’t synchronize, there is a danger of a data race, where the results of the program can change depending on how events happen to occur. For example, recall the analogy of the eight reporters writing a story on pages 44–45 of Chapter 1. Suppose one reporter needs to read all the prior sections before writing a conclusion. Hence, he or she must know when the other reporters have finished their sections, so that there is no danger of sections being changed afterwards. That is, they had better synchronize the writing and reading of each section so that the conclusion will be consistent with what is printed in the prior sections. In computing, synchronization mechanisms are typically built with user-level software routines that rely on hardware-supplied synchronization instructions. In this section, we focus on the implementation of lock and unlock synchronization operations. Lock and unlock can be used straightforwardly to create regions where only a single processor can operate, called a mutual exclusion, as well as to implement more complex synchronization mechanisms. The critical ability we require to implement synchronization in a multiprocessor is a set of hardware primitives with the ability to atomically read and modify a memory location. That is, nothing else can interpose itself between the read and the write of the memory location. Without such a capability, the cost of building basic synchronization primitives will be high and will increase unreasonably as the processor count increases. data race  Two memory accesses form a data race if they are from different threads to the same location, at least one is a write, and they occur one after another. I. What is the range of byte addresses for conditional branches in RISC-V (K = 1024)? 1. Addresses between 0 and 4K − 1 2. Addresses between 0 and 8K − 1 3. Addresses up to about 2K before the branch to about 2K after 4. Addresses up to about 4K before the branch to about 4K after II. What is the range of byte addresses for the jump-and-link instruction in RISC-V (M = 1024K)? 1. Addresses between 0 and 512K − 1 2. Addresses between 0 and 1M − 1 3. Addresses up to about 512K before the branch to about 512K after 4. Addresses up to about 1M before the branch to about 1M after Check Yourself

 2.11  Parallelism and Instructions: Synchronization There are a number of alternative formulations of the basic hardware primitives, all of which provide the ability to atomically read and modify a location, together with some way to tell if the read and write were performed atomically. In general, architects do not expect users to employ the basic hardware primitives, but instead expect system programmers will use the primitives to build a synchronization library, a process that is often complex and tricky. Let’s start with one such hardware primitive and show how it can be used to build a basic synchronization primitive. One typical operation for building synchronization operations is the atomic exchange or atomic swap, which inter- changes a value in a register for a value in memory. To see how to use this to build a basic synchronization primitive, assume that we want to build a simple lock where the value 0 is used to indicate that the lock is free and 1 is used to indicate that the lock is unavailable. A processor tries to set the lock by doing an exchange of 1, which is in a register, with the memory address corresponding to the lock. The value returned from the exchange instruction is 1 (unavailable) if some other processor had already claimed access, and 0 (free) otherwise. In the latter case, the value is also changed to 1 (unavailable), preventing any competing exchange in another processor from also retrieving a 0 (free). For example, consider two processors that each try to do the exchange simultaneously: this race is prevented, since exactly one of the processors will perform the exchange first, returning 0 (free), and the second processor will return 1 (unavailable) when it does the exchange. The key to using the exchange primitive to implement synchronization is that the operation is atomic: the exchange is indivisible, and two simultaneous exchanges will be ordered by the hardware. It is impossible for two processors trying to set the synchronization variable in this manner to both think they have simultaneously set the variable. Implementing a single atomic memory operation introduces some challenges in the design of the processor, since it requires both a memory read and a write in a single, uninterruptible instruction. An alternative is to have a pair of instructions in which the second instruction returns a value showing whether the pair of instructions was executed as if the pair was atomic. The pair of instructions is effectively atomic if it appears as if all other operations executed by any processor occurred before or after the pair. Thus, when an instruction pair is effectively atomic, no other processor can change the value between the pair of instructions. In RISC-V this pair of instructions includes a special load called a load-reserved word (lr.w) and a special store called a store-conditional word (sc.w). These instructions are used in sequence: if the contents of the memory location specified by the load- reserved are changed before the store-conditional to the same address occurs, then the store-conditional fails and does not write the value to memory. The store-conditional is defined to both store the value of a (presumably different) register in memory and to change the value of another register to a 0 if it succeeds and to a nonzero value if it fails. Thus, sc.w specifies three registers: one to hold the address, one to indicate whether the atomic operation failed or succeeded, and one to hold the value to be stored in memory if it succeeded. Since the load-reserved returns the initial value, and the 

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer store-conditional returns 0 only if it succeeds, the following sequence implements an atomic exchange on the memory location specified by the contents of x20: again:lr.w x10, (x20)           // load-reserved sc.w x11, x23, (x20)    // store-conditional bne x11, x0, again       // branch if store fails (0) addi x23, x10, 0            // put loaded value in x23 Any time a processor intervenes and modifies the value in memory between the lr.w and sc.w instructions, the sc.w writes a nonzero value into x11, causing the code sequence to try again. At the end of this sequence, the contents of x23 and the memory location specified by x20 have been atomically exchanged. Elaboration:  Although it was presented for multiprocessor synchronization, atomic exchange is also useful for the operating system in dealing with multiple processes in a single processor. To make sure nothing interferes in a single processor, the store- conditional also fails if the processor does a context switch between the two instructions (see Chapter 5). Elaboration:  An advantage of the load-reserved/store-conditional mechanism is that it can be used to build other synchronization primitives, such as atomic compare and swap or atomic fetch-and-increment, which are used in some parallel programming models. These involve more instructions between the lr.w and the sc.w, but not too many. Since the store-conditional will fail after either another attempted store to the load reservation address or any exception, care must be taken in choosing which instructions are inserted between the two instructions. In particular, only integer arithmetic, forward branches, and backward branches out of the load-reserved/store-conditional block can safely be permitted; otherwise, it is possible to create deadlock situations where the processor can never complete the sc.w because of repeated page faults. In addition, the number of instructions between the load-reserved and the store-conditional should be small to minimize the probability that either an unrelated event or a competing processor causes the store-conditional to fail frequently. Elaboration:  While the code above implemented an atomic exchange, the following code would more efficiently acquire a lock at the location in register x20, where the value of 0 means the lock was free and 1 to mean lock was acquired: addi x12, x0, 1          // copy locked value again: lr.w x10, (x20)        // load-reserved to read lock bne x10, x0, again   // check if it is 0 yet sc.w x11, x12, (x20)   // attempt to store new value bne x11, x0, again     // branch if store fails We release the lock just using a regular store to write 0 into the location: sw 0(x20)     // free lock by writing 0

 2.12  Translating and Starting a Program When do you use primitives like load-reserved and store-conditional? 1. When cooperating threads of a parallel program need to synchronize to get proper behavior for reading and writing shared data. 2. When cooperating processes on a uniprocessor need to synchronize for reading and writing shared data. 2.12 Translating and Starting a Program This section describes the four steps in transforming a C program into a file in nonvolatile storage (disk or flash memory) into a program running on a computer. Figure 2.20 shows the translation hierarchy. Some systems combine these steps to reduce translation time, but programs go through these four logical phases. This section follows this translation hierarchy. Check Yourself FIGURE 2.20  A translation hierarchy for C. A high-level language program is first compiled into an assembly language program and then assembled into an object module in machine language. The linker combines multiple modules with library routines to resolve all references. The loader then places the machine code into the proper memory locations for execution by the processor. To speed up the translation process, some steps are skipped or combined. Some compilers produce object modules directly, and some systems use linking loaders that perform the last two steps. To identify the type of file, UNIX follows a suffix convention for files: C source files are named x.c, assembly files are x.s, object files are named x.o, statically linked library routines are x.a, dynamically linked library routes are x.so, and executable files by default are called a.out. MS-DOS uses the suffixes .C, .ASM, .OBJ, .LIB, .DLL, and .EXE to the same effect. Loader C program Compiler Assembly language program Assembler Object: Machine language module Object: Library routine (machine language) Linker Memory Executable: Machine language program

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer Compiler The compiler transforms the C program into an assembly language program, a symbolic form of what the machine understands. High-level language programs take many fewer lines of code than assembly language, so programmer productivity is much higher. In 1975, many operating systems and assemblers were written in assembly language because memories were small and compilers were inefficient. The million-fold increase in memory capacity per single DRAM chip has reduced program size concerns, and optimizing compilers today can produce assembly language programs nearly as well as an assembly language expert, and sometimes even better for large programs. Assembler Since assembly language is an interface to higher-level software, the assembler can also treat common variations of machine language instructions as if they were instructions in their own right. The hardware need not implement these instructions; however, their appearance in assembly language simplifies translation and programming. Such instructions are called pseudoinstructions. As mentioned above, the RISC-V hardware makes sure that register x0 always has the value 0. That is, whenever register x0 is used, it supplies a 0, and if the programmer attempts to change the value in x0, the new value is simply discarded. Register x0 is used to create the assembly language instruction that copies the contents of one register to another. Thus, the RISC-V assembler accepts the following instruction even though it is not found in the RISC-V machine language: li x9, 123      // load immediate value 123 into register x9 The assembler converts this assembly language instruction into the machine language equivalent of the following instruction: addi x9, x0, 123 // register x9 gets register x0 + 123 The RISC-V assembler also converts mv (move) into an addi instruction. Thus mv x10, x11  // register x10 gets register x11 becomes addi x10, x11, 0  // register x10 gets register x11 + 0 The assembler also accepts j Label to unconditionally branch to a label, as a stand-in for jal x0, Label. It also converts branches to faraway locations into a branch and a jump. As mentioned above, the RISC-V assembler allows large constants to be loaded into a register despite the limited size of the immediate instructions. Thus, the load immediate (li) pseudoinstruction introduced above assembly language  A symbolic language that can be translated into binary machine language. pseudoinstruction  A common variation of assembly language instructions often treated as if it were an instruction in its own right.

 2.12  Translating and Starting a Program can create constants larger than addi’s immediate field can contain; the load address (la) macro works similarly for symbolic addresses. Finally, it can simplify the instruction set by determining which variation of an instruction the programmer wants. For example, the RISC-V assembler does not require the programmer to specify the immediate version of the instruction when using a constant for arithmetic and logical instructions; it just generates the proper opcode. Thus and x9, x10, 15 // register x9 gets x10 AND 15 becomes andi x9, x10, 15 // register x9 gets x10 AND 15 We include the “i” on the instructions to remind the reader that andi produces a different opcode in a different instruction format than the and instruction with no immediate operands. In summary, pseudoinstructions give RISC-V a richer set of assembly language instructions than those implemented by the hardware. If you are going to write assembly programs, use pseudoinstructions to simplify your task. To understand the RISC-V architecture and be sure to get best performance, however, study the real RISC-V instructions found in Figures 2.1 and 2.18. To reduce confusion about real instructions versus pseudoinstructions, Chapters 2 and 3 will only use real instructions even where an experienced assembly language programmer would use pseudoinstructions. Assemblers will also accept numbers in a variety of bases. In addition to binary and decimal, they usually accept a base that is more succinct than binary yet converts easily to a bit pattern. RISC-V assemblers use hexadecimal and octal. Such features are convenient, but the primary task of an assembler is assembly into machine code. The assembler turns the assembly language program into an object file, which is a combination of machine language instructions, data, and information needed to place instructions properly in memory. To produce the binary version of each instruction in the assembly language program, the assembler must determine the addresses corresponding to all labels. Assemblers keep track of labels used in branches and data transfer instructions in a symbol table. As you might expect, the table contains pairs of symbols and addresses. The object file for UNIX systems typically contains six distinct pieces: n The object file header describes the size and position of the other pieces of the object file. n The text segment contains the machine language code. n The static data segment contains data allocated for the life of the program. (UNIX allows programs to use both static data, which is allocated throughout the program, and dynamic data, which can grow or shrink as needed by the program. See Figure 2.13.) n The relocation information identifies instructions and data words that depend on absolute addresses when the program is loaded into memory. symbol table  A table that matches names of labels to the addresses of the memory words that instructions occupy.

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer n The symbol table contains the remaining labels that are not defined, such as external references. n The debugging information contains a concise description of how the modules were compiled so that a debugger can associate machine instructions with C source files and make data structures readable. The next subsection shows how to attach such routines that have already been assembled, such as library routines. Linker What we have presented so far suggests that a single change to one line of one procedure requires compiling and assembling the whole program. Complete retranslation is a terrible waste of computing resources. This repetition is particularly wasteful for standard library routines, because programmers would be compiling and assembling routines that by definition almost never change. An alternative is to compile and assemble each procedure independently, so that a change to one line would require compiling and assembling only one procedure. This alternative requires a new systems program, called a link editor or linker, which takes all the independently assembled machine language programs and “stitches” them together. The reason a linker is useful is that it is much faster to patch code than it is to recompile and reassemble. There are three steps for the linker: 1. Place code and data modules symbolically in memory. 2. Determine the addresses of data and instruction labels. 3. Patch both the internal and external references. The linker uses the relocation information and symbol table in each object module to resolve all undefined labels. Such references occur in branch instructions and data addresses, so the job of this program is much like that of an editor: it finds the old addresses and replaces them with the new addresses. Editing is the origin of the name “link editor,” or linker for short. If all external references are resolved, the linker next determines the memory locations each module will occupy. Recall that Figure 2.13 on page 112 shows the RISC-V convention for allocation of program and data to memory. Since the files were assembled in isolation, the assembler could not know where a module’s instructions and data would be placed relative to other modules. When the linker places a module in memory, all absolute references, that is, memory addresses that are not relative to a register, must be relocated to reflect its true location. The linker produces an executable file that can be run on a computer. Typically, this file has the same format as an object file, except that it contains no unresolved references. It is possible to have partially linked files, such as library routines, that still have unresolved addresses and hence result in object files. linker  Also called link editor. A systems program that combines independently assembled machine language programs and resolves all undefined labels into an executable file. executable file  A functional program in the format of an object file that contains no unresolved references. It can contain symbol tables and debugging information. A “stripped executable” does not contain that information. Relocation information may be included for the loader.

 2.12  Translating and Starting a Program Linking Object Files Link the two object files below. Show updated addresses of the first few instructions of the completed executable file. We show the instructions in assembly language just to make the example understandable; in reality, the instructions would be numbers. Note that in the object files we have highlighted the addresses and symbols that must be updated in the link process: the instructions that refer to the addresses of procedures A and B and the instructions that refer to the addresses of data words X and Y. Object file header Name Procedure A Text size 100hex Data size 20hex Text segment Address Instruction lw x10, 0(x3) jal x1, 0 . . . . . . Data segment (X) . . . . . . Relocation information Address Instruction type Dependency lw X jal B Symbol table Label Address X – B – Name Procedure B Text size 200hex Data size 30hex Text segment Address Instruction sw x11, 0(x3) jal x1, 0 . . . . . . Data segment (Y) . . . . . . Relocation information Address Instruction type Dependency sw Y jal A Symbol table Label Address Y – A – Procedure A needs to find the address for the variable labeled X to put in the load instruction and to find the address of procedure B to place in the jal EXAMPLE

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer instruction. Procedure B needs the address of the variable labeled Y for the store instruction and the address of procedure A for its jal instruction. From Figure 2.14 on page 113, we know that the text segment starts at address 0000 0000 0040 0000hex and the data segment at 0000 0000 1000 0000hex. The text of procedure A is placed at the first address and its data at the second. The object file header for procedure A says that its text is 100hex bytes and its data is 20hex bytes, so the starting address for procedure B text is 40 0100hex, and its data starts at 1000 0020hex. Executable file header Text size 300hex Data size 50hex Text segment Address Instruction 0000 0000 0040 0000hex lw x10, 0(x3) 0000 0000 0040 0004hex jal x1, 252ten . . . . . . 0000 0000 0040 0100hex sw x11, 32(x3) 0000 0000 0040 0104hex jal x1, -260ten . . . . . . Data segment Address 0000 0000 1000 0000hex (X) . . . . . . 0000 0000 1000 0020hex (Y) . . . . . . Now the linker updates the address fields of the instructions. It uses the instruction type field to know the format of the address to be edited. We have three types here: 1. The jump and link instructions use PC-relative addressing. Thus, for the jal at address 40 0004hex to go to 40 0100hex (the address of procedure B), it must put (40 0100hex – 40 0004hex) or 252ten in its address field. Similarly, since 40 0000hex is the address of procedure A, the jal at 40 0104hex gets the negative number -260ten (40 0000hex – 40 0104hex) in its address field. 2. The load addresses are harder because they are relative to a base register. This example uses x3 as the base register, assuming it is initialized to 0000 0000 1000 0000hex. To get the address 0000 0000 1000 0000hex (the address of word X), we place 0ten in the address field of lw at address 40 0000hex. Similarly, we place 20hex in the address field of sw at address 40 0100hex to get the address 0000 0000 1000 0020hex (the address of doubleword Y). 3. Store addresses are handled just like load addresses, except that their S-type instruction format represents immediates differently than loads’ I-type format. We place 32ten in the address field of sw at address 40 0100hex to get the address 0000 0000 1000 0020hex (the address of word Y). ANSWER

 2.12  Translating and Starting a Program Loader Now that the executable file is on disk, the operating system reads it to memory and starts it. The loader follows these steps in UNIX systems: 1. Reads the executable file header to determine size of the text and data segments. 2. Creates an address space large enough for the text and data. 3. Copies the instructions and data from the executable file into memory. 4. Copies the parameters (if any) to the main program onto the stack. 5. Initializes the processor registers and sets the stack pointer to the first free location. 6. Branches to a start-up routine that copies the parameters into the argument registers and calls the main routine of the program. When the main routine returns, the start-up routine terminates the program with an exit system call. Dynamically Linked Libraries The first part of this section describes the traditional approach to linking libraries before the program is run. Although this static approach is the fastest way to call library routines, it has a few disadvantages: n The library routines become part of the executable code. If a new version of the library is released that fixes bugs or supports new hardware devices, the statically linked program keeps using the old version. n It loads all routines in the library that are called anywhere in the executable, even if those calls are not executed. The library can be large relative to the program; for example, the standard C library on a RISC-V system running the Linux operating system is 1.5 MiB. These disadvantages lead to dynamically linked libraries (DLLs), where the library routines are not linked and loaded until the program is run. Both the program and library routines keep extra information on the location of nonlocal procedures and their names. In the original version of DLLs, the loader ran a dynamic linker, using the extra information in the file to find the appropriate libraries and to update all external references. The downside of the initial version of DLLs was that it still linked all routines of the library that might be called, versus just those that are called during the running of the program. This observation led to the lazy procedure linkage version of DLLs, where each routine is linked only after it is called. Like many innovations in our field, this trick relies on a level of indirection. Figure 2.21 shows the technique. It starts with the nonlocal routines calling a set of dummy routines at the end of the program, with one entry per nonlocal routine. These dummy entries each contain an indirect branch. loader  A systems program that places an object program in main memory so that it is ready to execute. dynamically linked libraries (DLLs)  Library routines that are linked to a program during execution. Virtually every problem in computer science can be solved by another level of indirection. David Wheeler

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer FIGURE 2.21  Dynamically linked library via lazy procedure linkage. (a) Steps for the first time a call is made to the DLL routine. (b) The steps to find the routine, remap it, and link it are skipped on subsequent calls. As we will see in Chapter 5, the operating system may avoid copying the desired routine by remapping it using virtual memory management. Text JAL (a) First call to DLL routine (b) Subsequent calls to DLL routine LW JALR ... ... Data Text ADDI x0, ID JAL ... ... Text Data/Text Dynamic linker/loader Remap DLL routine JAL ... DLL routine JALR ... Text LW JALR ... ... JAL Data DLL routine JALR ... Text The first time the library routine is called, the program calls the dummy entry and follows the indirect branch. It points to code that puts a number in a register to identify the desired library routine and then branches to the dynamic linker/ loader. The linker/loader finds the wanted routine, remaps it, and changes the address in the indirect branch location to point to that routine. It then branches to it. When the routine completes, it returns to the original calling site. Thereafter, the call to the library routine branches indirectly to the routine without the extra hops. In summary, DLLs require additional space for the information needed for dynamic linking, but do not require that whole libraries be copied or linked. They pay a good deal of overhead the first time a routine is called, but only a single indirect branch thereafter. Note that the return from the library pays no extra overhead. Microsoft’s Windows relies extensively on dynamically linked libraries, and it is also the default when executing programs on UNIX systems today.

 2.12  Translating and Starting a Program Starting a Java Program The discussion above captures the traditional model of executing a program, where the emphasis is on fast execution time for a program targeted to a specific instruction set architecture, or even a particular implementation of that architecture. Indeed, it is possible to execute Java programs just like C. Java was invented with a different set of goals, however. One was to run safely on any computer, even if it might slow execution time. Figure 2.22 shows the typical translation and execution steps for Java. Rather than compile to the assembly language of a target computer, Java is compiled first to instructions that are easy to interpret: the Java bytecode instruction set (see Section 2.15). This instruction set is designed to be close to the Java language so that this compilation step is trivial. Virtually no optimizations are performed. Like the C compiler, the Java compiler checks the types of data and produces the proper operation for each type. Java programs are distributed in the binary version of these bytecodes. A software interpreter, called a Java Virtual Machine (JVM), can execute Java bytecodes. An interpreter is a program that simulates an instruction set architecture. For example, the RISC-V simulator used with this book is an interpreter. There is no need for a separate assembly step, since either the translation is so simple that the compiler fills in the addresses or JVM finds them at runtime. The upside of interpretation is portability. The availability of software Java virtual machines meant that most people could write and run Java programs shortly after Java bytecode  Instruction from an instruction set designed to interpret Java programs. Java Virtual Machine (JVM)  The program that interprets Java bytecodes. FIGURE 2.22  A translation hierarchy for Java. A Java program is first compiled into a binary version of Java bytecodes, with all addresses defined by the compiler. The Java program is now ready to run on the interpreter, called the Java Virtual Machine (JVM). The JVM links to desired methods in the Java library while the program is running. To achieve greater performance, the JVM can invoke the JIT compiler, which selectively compiles methods into the native machine language of the machine on which it is running. Java program Compiler Class files (Java bytecodes) Java Virtual Machine Compiled Java methods (machine language) Java library routines (machine language) Just In Time compiler

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer Java was announced. Today, Java virtual machines are found in billions of devices, in everything from cell phones to Internet browsers. The downside of interpretation is lower performance. The incredible advances in performance of the 1980s and 1990s made interpretation viable for many important applications, but the factor of 10 slowdown when compared to traditionally compiled C programs made Java unattractive for some applications. To preserve portability and improve execution speed, the next phase of Java’s development was compilers that translated while the program was running. Such Just In Time compilers (JIT) typically profile the running program to find where the “hot” methods are and then compile them into the native instruction set on which the virtual machine is running. The compiled portion is saved for the next time the program is run, so that it can run faster each time it is run. This balance of interpretation and compilation evolves over time, so that frequently run Java programs suffer little of the overhead of interpretation. As computers get faster so that compilers can do more, and as researchers invent betters ways to compile Java on the fly, the performance gap between Java and C or C++ is closing. Section 2.15 goes into much greater depth on the implementation of Java, Java bytecodes, JVM, and JIT compilers. Which of the advantages of an interpreter over a translator was the most important for the designers of Java? 1. Ease of writing an interpreter 2. Better error messages 3. Smaller object code 4. Machine independence 2.13 A C Sort Example to Put it All Together One danger of showing assembly language code in snippets is that you will have no idea what a full assembly language program looks like. In this section, we derive the RISC-V code from two procedures written in C: one to swap array elements and one to sort them. Just In Time compiler (JIT)  The name commonly given to a compiler that operates at runtime, translating the interpreted code segments into the native code of the computer. Check Yourself

 2.13  A C Sort Example to Put it All Together The Procedure swap Let’s start with the code for the procedure swap in Figure 2.23. This procedure simply swaps two locations in memory. When translating from C to assembly language by hand, we follow these general steps: 1. Allocate registers to program variables. 2. Produce code for the body of the procedure. 3. Preserve registers across the procedure invocation. This section describes the swap procedure in these three pieces, concluding by putting all the pieces together. Register Allocation for swap As mentioned on page 104, the RISC-V convention on parameter passing is to use registers x10 to x17. Since swap has just two parameters, v and k, they will be found in registers x10 and x11. The only other variable is temp, which we associate with register x5 since swap is a leaf procedure (see page 108). This register allocation corresponds to the variable declarations in the first part of the swap procedure in Figure 2.23. Code for the Body of the Procedure swap The remaining lines of C code in swap are temp = v[k]; v[k] = v[k+1]; v[k+1] = temp; Recall that the memory address for RISC-V refers to the byte address, and so words are really 4 bytes apart. Hence, we need to multiply the index k by 4 before adding it to the address. Forgetting that sequential word addresses differ by 4 instead of by 1 is a common mistake in assembly language programming. FIGURE 2.23  A C procedure that swaps two locations in memory. This subsection uses this procedure in a sorting example.

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer Hence, the first step is to get the address of v[k] by multiplying k by 4 via a shift left by 2: slli    x6, x11, 2          // reg x6 = k * 4 add     x6, x10, x6           // reg x6 = v + (k * 4) Now we load v[k] using x6, and then v[k+1] by adding 4 to x6: lw    x5, 0(x6)      // reg x5 (temp) = v[k] lw    x7, 4(x6)    // reg x7 = v[k + 1]                       // refers to next element of v Next we store x9 and x11 to the swapped addresses: sw    x7, 0(x6)    // v[k] = reg x7 sw    x5, 4(x6)      // v[k+1] = reg x5 (temp) Now we have allocated registers and written the code to perform the operations of the procedure. What is missing is the code for preserving the saved registers used within swap. Since we are not using saved registers in this leaf procedure, there is nothing to preserve. The Full swap Procedure We are now ready for the whole routine. All that remains is to add the procedure label and the return branch. swap: slli x6, x11, 2 // reg x6 = k * 4   add x6, x10, x6 // reg x6 = v + (k * 4)   lw x5, 0(x6) // reg x5 (temp) = v[k]   lw x7, 4(x6) // reg x7 = v[k + 1]   sw x7, 0(x6) // v[k] = reg x7   sw x5, 4(x6) // v[k+1] = reg x5 (temp)   jalr x0, 0(x1) // return to calling routine The Procedure sort To ensure that you appreciate the rigor of programming in assembly language, we’ll try a second, longer example. In this case, we’ll build a routine that calls the swap procedure. This program sorts an array of integers, using bubble or exchange sort, which is one of the simplest if not the fastest sorts. Figure 2.24 shows the C version of the program. Once again, we present this procedure in several steps, concluding with the full procedure.

 2.13  A C Sort Example to Put it All Together Register Allocation for sort The two parameters of the procedure sort, v and n, are in the parameter registers x10 and x11, and we assign register x19 to i and register x20 to j. Code for the Body of the Procedure sort The procedure body consists of two nested for loops and a call to swap that includes parameters. Let’s unwrap the code from the outside to the middle. The first translation step is the first for loop: for (i = 0; i < n; i += 1) { Recall that the C for statement has three parts: initialization, loop test, and iteration increment. It takes just one instruction to initialize i to 0, the first part of the for statement: addi  x19,  x0, 0 It also takes just one instruction to increment i, the last part of the for statement: addi  x19, x19, 1  // i += 1 The loop should be exited if i < n is not true or, said another way, should be exited if i ≥ n. This test takes just one instruction: for1tst: bge x19, x11, exit1  // go to exit1 if x19 ≥ x1 (i≥n) The bottom of the loop just branches back to the loop test:         j  for1tst    // branch to test of outer loop exit1: The skeleton code of the first for loop is then     addi x19, x0, 0                 // i = 0 for1tst:     bge x19, x11, exit1      // go to exit1 if x19 ≥ x1 (i≥n)       …             (body of first for loop)       … FIGURE 2.24  A C procedure that performs a sort on the array v.

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer          addi x19, x19, 1    // i += 1          j  for1tst             // branch to test of outer loop exit1: Voila! (The exercises explore writing faster code for similar loops.) The second for loop looks like this in C: for (j = i – 1; j >= 0 && v[j] > v[j + 1]; j -= 1) { The initialization portion of this loop is again one instruction: addi    x20, x19, -1 // j = i – 1 The decrement of j at the end of the loop is also one instruction: addi    x20, x20, -1 j = 1 The loop test has two parts. We exit the loop if either condition fails, so the first test must exit the loop if it fails (j < 0): for2tst:   blt x20, x0, exit2 // go to exit2 if x20 < 0 (j < 0) This branch will skip over the second condition test. If it doesn’t skip, then j ≥ 0. The second test exits if v[j] > v[j + 1] is not true, or exits if v[j] ≤ v[j + 1]. First we create the address by multiplying j by 4 (since we need a byte address) and add it to the base address of v: slli      x5, x20, 2        // reg x5 = j * 4 add        x5, x10, x5        // reg x5 = v + (j * 4) Now we load v[j]: lw      x6, 0(x5)      // reg x6 = v[j] Since we know that the second element is just the following word, we add 4 to the address in register x5 to get v[j + 1]: lw    x7, 4(x5)      // reg x7 = v[j + 1] We test v[j] ≤ v[j + 1] to exit the loop: ble    x6, x7, exit2 // go to exit2 if x6 ≤ x7 The bottom of the loop branches back to the inner loop test: jal, x0          for2tst            // branch to test of inner loop Combining the pieces, the skeleton of the second for loop looks like this: addi x20, x19, -1 // j = i - 1 for2tst:   blt x20, x0, exit2 // go to exit2 if x20 < 0 (j < 0) slli x5, x20, 2 // reg x5 = j * 4 add x5, x10, x5 // reg x5 = v + (j * 4) lw x6, 0(x5) // reg x6 = v[j]

 2.13  A C Sort Example to Put it All Together lw x7, 4(x5) // reg x7 = v[j + 1] ble    x6, x7, exit2 // go to exit2 if x6 ≤ x7 . . . (body of second for loop) . . . addi x20, x20, -1 // j -= 1 jal, x0 for2tst // branch to test of inner loop exit2: The Procedure Call in sort The next step is the body of the second for loop: swap(v,j); Calling swap is easy enough: jal x1, swap Passing Parameters in sort The problem comes when we want to pass parameters because the sort procedure needs the values in registers x10 and x11, yet the swap procedure needs to have its parameters placed in those same registers. One solution is to copy the parameters for sort into other registers earlier in the procedure, making registers x10 and x11 available for the call of swap. (This copy is faster than saving and restoring on the stack.) We first copy x10 and x11 into x21 and x22 during the procedure: addi x21, x10, 0 // copy parameter x10 into x21 addi x22, x11, 0 // copy parameter x11 into x22 Then we pass the parameters to swap with these two instructions: addi x10, x21, 0 // first swap parameter is v addi x11, x20, 0 // second swap parameter is j Preserving Registers in sort The only remaining code is the saving and restoring of registers. Clearly, we must save the return address in register x1, since sort is a procedure and is itself called. The sort procedure also uses the callee-saved registers x19, x20, x21, and x22, so they must be saved. The prologue of the sort procedure is then addi sp, sp, -20 // make room on stack for 5 regs sw x1, 16(sp) // save x1 on stack sw x22, 12(sp) // save x22 on stack sw x21, 8(sp) // save x21 on stack sw x20, 4(sp) // save x20 on stack sw x19, 0(sp) // save x19 on stack

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer The tail of the procedure simply reverses all these instructions, and then adds a jalr to return. The Full Procedure sort Now we put all the pieces together in Figure 2.25, being careful to replace references to registers x10 and x11 in the for loops with references to registers x21 and x22. Once again, to make the code easier to follow, we identify each block of code with its purpose in the procedure. In this example, nine lines of the sort procedure in C became 34 lines in the RISC-V assembly language. FIGURE 2.25  RISC-V assembly version of procedure sort in Figure 2.27.

 2.13  A C Sort Example to Put it All Together Elaboration:  One optimization that works with this example is procedure inlining. Instead of passing arguments in parameters and invoking the code with a jal instruction, the compiler would copy the code from the body of the swap procedure where the call to swap appears in the code. Inlining would avoid four instructions in this example. The downside of the inlining optimization is that the compiled code would be bigger if the inlined procedure is called from several locations. Such a code expansion might turn into lower performance if it increased the cache miss rate; see Chapter 5. Figure 2.26 shows the impact of compiler optimization on sort program performance, compile time, clock cycles, instruction count, and CPI. Note that unoptimized code has the best CPI, and O1 optimization has the lowest instruction count, but O3 is the fastest, reminding us that time is the only accurate measure of program performance. Figure 2.27 compares the impact of programming languages, compilation versus interpretation, and algorithms on performance of sorts. The fourth column shows that the unoptimized C program is 8.3 times faster than the interpreted Java code for Bubble Sort. Using the JIT compiler makes Java 2.1 times faster than the unoptimized C and within a factor of 1.13 of the highest optimized C code. ( Section 2.15 gives more details on interpretation versus compilation of Java and the Java and jalr code for Bubble Sort.) The ratios aren’t as close for Quicksort in Column 5, presumably because it is harder to amortize the cost of runtime compilation over the shorter execution time. The last column demonstrates the impact of a better algorithm, offering three orders of magnitude a performance increase by when sorting 100,000 items. Even comparing interpreted Java in Column 5 to the C compiler at highest optimization in Column 4, Quicksort beats Bubble Sort by a factor of 50 (0.05 × 2468, or 123 times faster than the unoptimized C code versus 2.41 times faster). Understanding Program Performance FIGURE 2.26  Comparing performance, instruction count, and CPI using compiler optimization for Bubble Sort. The programs sorted 100,000 32-bit words with the array initialized to random values. These programs were run on a Pentium 4 with a clock rate of 3.06 GHz and a 533 MHz system bus with 2 GB of PC2100 DDR SDRAM. It used Linux version 2.4.20.

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer 2.14 Arrays versus Pointers A challenge for any new C programmer is understanding pointers. Comparing assembly code that uses arrays and array indices to the assembly code that uses pointers offers insights about pointers. This section shows C and RISC-V assembly versions of two procedures to clear a sequence of words in memory: one using array indices and one with pointers. Figure 2.28 shows the two C procedures. The purpose of this section is to show how pointers map into RISC-V instructions, and not to endorse a dated programming style. We’ll see the impact of modern compiler optimization on these two procedures at the end of the section. FIGURE 2.27  Performance of two sort algorithms in C and Java using interpretation and optimizing compilers relative to unoptimized C version. The last column shows the advantage in performance of Quicksort over Bubble Sort for each language and execution option. These programs were run on the same system as in Figure 2.29. The JVM is Sun version 1.3.1, and the JIT is Sun Hotspot version 1.3.1. FIGURE 2.28  Two C procedures for setting an array to all zeros. clear1 uses indices, while clear2 uses pointers. The second procedure needs some explanation for those unfamiliar with C. The address of a variable is indicated by &, and the object pointed to by a pointer is indicated by *. The declarations declare that array and p are pointers to integers. The first part of the for loop in clear2 assigns the address of the first element of array to the pointer p. The second part of the for loop tests to see if the pointer is pointing beyond the last element of array. Incrementing a pointer by one, in the bottom part of the for loop, means moving the pointer to the next sequential object of its declared size. Since p is a pointer to integers, the compiler will generate RISC-V instructions to increment p by four, the number of bytes in an RISC-V integer. The assignment in the loop places 0 in the object pointed to by p.

 2.14  Arrays versus Pointers Array Version of Clear Let’s start with the array version, clear1, focusing on the body of the loop and ignoring the procedure linkage code. We assume that the two parameters array and size are found in the registers x10 and x11, and that i is allocated to register x5. The initialization of i, the first part of the for loop, is straightforward: addi    x5, x0, 0    // i = 0 (register x5 = 0) To set array[i] to 0 we must first get its address. Start by multiplying i by 4 to get the byte address: loop1: slli    x6, x5, 2    // x6 = i * 4 Since the starting address of the array is in a register, we must add it to the index to get the address of array[i] using an add instruction: add  x7, x10, x6    // x7 = address of array[i] Finally, we can store 0 in that address: sw  x0, 0(x7)    // array[i] = 0 This instruction is the end of the body of the loop, so the next step is to increment i: addi x5, x5, 1    // i = i + 1 The loop test checks if i is less than size: blt  x5, x11, loop1 // if (i < size) go to loop1 We have now seen all the pieces of the procedure. Here is the RISC-V code for clearing an array using indices: addi x5, x0, 0 // i = 0 loop1: slli x6, x5, 2 // x6 = i * 4 add x7, x10, x6 // x7 = address of array[i] sw x0, 0(x7) // array[i] = 0 addi x5, x5, 1 // i = i + 1 blt x5, x11, loop1 // if (i < size) go to loop1 (This code works as long as size is greater than 0; ANSI C requires a test of size before the loop, but we’ll skip that legality here.) Pointer Version of Clear The second procedure that uses pointers allocates the two parameters array and size to the registers x10 and x11 and allocates p to register x5. The code for the 

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer second procedure starts with assigning the pointer p to the address of the first element of the array: mv    x5, x10    // p = address of array[0] The next code is the body of the for loop, which simply stores 0 into p: loop2: sw    x0, 0(x5)    // Memory[p] = 0 This instruction implements the body of the loop, so the next code is the iteration increment, which changes p to point to the next word: addi    x5, x5, 4    // p = p + 4 Incrementing a pointer by 1 means moving the pointer to the next sequential object in C. Since p is a pointer to integers declared as int, each of which uses 4 bytes, the compiler increments p by 4. The loop test is next. The first step is calculating the address of the last element of array. Start with multiplying size by 8 to get its byte address: slli    x6, x11, 2    // x6 = size * 4 and then we add the product to the starting address of the array to get the address of the first doubleword after the array: add    x7, x10, x6      // x7 = address of array[size] The loop test is simply to see if p is less than the last element of array: bltu x5, x7, loop2     // if (p<&array[size]) go to loop2 With all the pieces completed, we can show a pointer version of the code to zero an array: addi x5, x10, 0 // p = address of array[0] loop2: sw x0, 0(x5) // Memory[p] = 0 addi x5, x5, 4 // p = p + 4 slli  x6, x11, 2 // x6 = size * 4 add    x7, x10, x6 // x7 = address of array[size] bltu x5, x7, loop2 // if (p<&array[size]) go to loop2 As in the first example, this code assumes size is greater than 0. Note that this program calculates the address of the end of the array in every iteration of the loop, even though it does not change. A faster version of the code moves this calculation outside the loop: addi x5, x10, 0 // p = address of array[0] slli x6, x11, 2 // x6 = size * 4 add x7, x10, x6 // x7 = address of array[size] loop2: sw x0, 0(x5) // Memory[p] = 0 addi x5, x5, 4 // p = p + 4 bltu x5, x7, loop2 // if (p < &array[size]) go to loop2

 2.15  Advanced Material: Compiling C and Interpreting Java Comparing the Two Versions of Clear Comparing the two code sequences side by side illustrates the difference between array indices and pointers (the changes introduced by the pointer version are highlighted): The version on the left must have the “multiply” and add inside the loop because i is incremented and each address must be recalculated from the new index. The memory pointer version on the right increments the pointer p directly. The pointer version moves the scaling shift and the array bound addition outside the loop, thereby reducing the instructions executed per iteration from five to three. This manual optimization corresponds to the compiler optimization of strength reduction (shift instead of multiply) and induction variable elimination (eliminating array address calculations within loops). Section 2.15 describes these two and many other optimizations. Elaboration:  As mentioned earlier, a C compiler would add a test to be sure that size is greater than 0. One way would be to branch to the instruction after the loop with blt x0, x11, afterLoop. People were once taught to use pointers in C to get greater efficiency than that available with arrays: “Use pointers, even if you can’t understand the code.” Modern optimizing compilers can produce code for the array version that is just as good. Most programmers today prefer that the compiler do the heavy lifting. 2.15 Advanced Material: Compiling C and Interpreting Java This section gives a brief overview of how the C compiler works and how Java is executed. Because the compiler will significantly affect the performance of a computer, understanding compiler technology today is critical to understanding addi x5, x0, 0 // i = 0 addi x5, 0 // p = address of array[0] loop1: slli x6, x5, 2 // x6 = i * 4 slli x6, x11, 2 // x6 = size * 4 add x7, x10, x6 // x7 = address of array[i] add x7, x10, x6 // x7 = address of array[size] sw x0, 0(x7) // array[i] = 0 loop2: sw x0, 0(x5) // Memory[p] = 0 addi x5, x5, 1 // i = i + 1 addi x5, x5, 4 // p = p + 4 blt x5, x11, loop1 // if (i < size) go to loop1 bltu x5, x7, loop2 // if (p < &array[size]) go to loop2 2.15 Understanding Program Performance

 2.15  Advanced Material: Compiling C and Interpreting Java 151.e1 Advanced Material: Compiling C and Interpreting Java This section gives a brief overview of how the C compiler works and how Java is executed. Because the compiler will significantly affect the performance of a computer, understanding compiler technology today is critical to understanding performance. Keep in mind that the subject of compiler construction is usually taught in a one- or two-semester course, so our introduction will necessarily only touch on the basics. The second part of this section, starting on page 150.e15, is for readers interested in seeing how an objected-oriented language like Java executes on the RISC-V architecture. It shows the Java bytecodes used for interpretation and the RISC-V code for the Java version of some of the C segments in prior sections, including Bubble Sort. It covers both the Java virtual machine and just-in-time (JIT) compilers. Compiling C This first part of the section introduces the internal anatomy of a compiler. To start, Figure e2.15.1 shows the structure of recent compilers, and we describe the optimizations in the order of the passes of that structure. FIGURE e2.15.1  The structure of a modern optimizing compiler consists of a number of passes or phases. Logically, each pass can be thought of as running to completion before the next occurs. In practice, some passes may handle one procedure at a time, essentially interleaving with another pass. Dependencies Language dependent; machine independent Somewhat language dependent; largely machine independent Small language dependencies; machine dependencies slight (e.g., register counts/types) Highly machine dependent; language independent Front end per language Function Transform language to common intermediate form For example, loop transformations and procedure inlining (also called procedure integration) Including global and local optimizations register allocation Detailed instruction selection and machine-dependent optimizations; may include or be followed by assembler High-level optimizations Global optimizer Code generator Intermediate representation

151.e2 2.15  Advanced Material: Compiling C and Interpreting Java To illustrate the concepts in this part of this section, we will use the C version of a while loop from page 95: while (save[i] == k)        i += 1; The Front End The function of the front end is to read in a source program; check the syntax and semantics; and translate the source program to an intermediate form that interprets most of the language-specific operation of the program. As we will see, intermediate forms are usually simple, and some are, in fact, similar to the Java bytecodes (see Figure e2.15.8). The front end is typically broken into four separate functions: 1. Scanning reads in individual characters and creates a string of tokens. Examples of tokens are reserved words, names, operators, and punctuation symbols. In the above example, the token sequence is while, (, save, [, i, ], ==, k, ), i, +=, 1. A word like while is recognized as a reserved word in C, but save, i, and j are recognized as names, and 1 is recognized as a number. 2. Parsing takes the token stream, ensures the syntax is correct, and produces an abstract syntax tree, which is a representation of the syntactic structure of the program. Figure e2.15.2 shows what the abstract syntax tree might look like for this program fragment. 3. Semantic analysis takes the abstract syntax tree and checks the program for semantic correctness. Semantic checks normally ensure that variables and types are properly declared and that the types of operators and objects match, a step called type checking. During this process, a symbol table representing all the named objects—classes, variables, and functions—is usually created and used to type-check the program. 4. Generation of the intermediate representation (IR) takes the symbol table and the abstract syntax tree and generates the intermediate representation that is the output of the front end. Intermediate representations usually use simple operations on a small set of primitive types, such as integers, characters, and reals. Java bytecodes represent one type of intermediate form. In modern compilers, the most common intermediate form looks much like the RISC-V instruction set but with an infinite number of virtual registers; later, we describe how to map these virtual registers to a finite set of real registers. Figure e2.15.3 shows how our example might be represented in such an intermediate form. The intermediate form specifies the functionality of the program in a manner independent of the original source. After this front end has created the intermediate form, the remaining passes are largely language independent.

 2.15  Advanced Material: Compiling C and Interpreting Java 151.e3 High-Level Optimizations High-level optimizations are transformations that are done at something close to the source level. The most common high-level transformation is probably procedure inlining, which replaces a call to a function by the body of the function, substituting the caller’s arguments for the procedure’s parameters. Other high-level optimizations involve loop transformations that can reduce loop overhead, improve memory access, and exploit the hardware more effectively. For example, in loops that execute many iterations, such as those traditionally controlled by a for statement, the optimization of loop-unrolling is often useful. Loop-unrolling involves taking a loop, replicating the body multiple times, and executing the transformed loop fewer times. Loop-unrolling reduces the loop overhead and provides opportunities for many other optimizations. Other types of high-level transformations include while statement while y d o b t n e m e t a ts n oitid n o c expression  assignment  comparison left-hand side expression identifier factor l number k y a rr a expression expression expression factor factor array access identifier identifier factor save identifier i FIGURE e2.15.2  An abstract syntax tree for the while example. The roots of the tree consist of the informational tokens such as numbers and names. Long chains of straight-line descendents are often omitted in constructing the tree. loop-unrolling  A technique to get more performance from loops that access arrays, in which multiple copies of the loop body are made and instructions from different iterations are scheduled together.

151.e4 2.15  Advanced Material: Compiling C and Interpreting Java sophisticated loop transformations such as interchanging nested loops and blocking loops to obtain better memory behavior; see Chapter 5 for examples. Local and Global Optimizations Within the pass dedicated to local and global optimization, three classes of optimization are performed: 1. Local optimization works within a single basic block. A local optimization pass is often run as a precursor and successor to global optimization to “clean up” the code before and after global optimization. 2. Global optimization works across multiple basic blocks; we will see an example of this shortly. 3. Global register allocation allocates variables to registers for regions of the code. Register allocation is crucial to getting good performance in modern processors. Several optimizations are performed both locally and globally, including common subexpression elimination, constant propagation, copy propagation, dead store elimination, and strength reduction. Let’s look at some simple examples of these optimizations. loop: # comments are written like this--source code often included # while (save[i] == k) addi r100, x0, save # r100 = &save[0] lw r101, i addi r102, x0, 4 mul r103, r101, r102 add r104, r103, r100 lw r105, 0(r104) # r105 = save[i] lw r106, k bne r105, r106, exit # i += 1 lw r106, i addi r107, r106, i # increment sw r107, i jal x0 loop # next iteration exit: FIGURE e2.15.3  The while loop example is shown using a typical intermediate representation. In practice, the names save, i, and k would be replaced by some sort of address, such as a reference to either the local stack pointer or a global pointer, and an offset, similar to the way save[i] is accessed. Note that the format of the RISC-V instructions is different from the rest of the chapter, because they represent intermediate representations here using rXX notation for virtual registers.

 2.15  Advanced Material: Compiling C and Interpreting Java 151.e5 Common subexpression elimination finds multiple instances of the same expression and replaces the second one by a reference to the first. Consider, for example, a code segment to add 4 to an array element: x[i] = x[i] + 4 The address calculation for x[i] occurs twice and is identical since neither the starting address of x nor the value of i changes. Thus, the calculation can be reused. Let’s look at the intermediate code for this fragment, since it allows several other optimizations to be performed. The unoptimized intermediate code is on the left. On the right is the optimized code, using common subexpression elimination to replace the second address calculation with the first. Note that the register allocation has not yet occurred, so the compiler is using virtual register numbers like r100 here. // x[i] + 4 // x[i] + 4 addi r100, x0, x addi r100, x0, x lw r101,i lw r101,i mul r102,r101,4 slli r102,r101,2 add r103,r100,r102 add r103,r100,r102 lw r104, 0(r103) lw r104, 0(r103) // // value of x[i] is in r104 addi r105, r104,4 addi r105, r104,4 addi r106, x0, x sw r105, 0(r103) lw r107,i mul r108,r107,4 add r109,r106,r107 sw r105,0(r109) If the same optimization were possible across two basic blocks, it would then be an instance of global common subexpression elimination. Let’s consider some of the other optimizations: ■ Strength reduction replaces complex operations by simpler ones and can be applied to this code segment, replacing the mul by a shift left. ■ Constant propagation and its sibling constant folding find constants in code and propagate them, collapsing constant values whenever possible. ■ Copy propagation propagates values that are simple copies, eliminating the need to reload values and possibly enabling other optimizations, such as common subexpression elimination. ■ Dead store elimination finds stores to values that are not used again and eliminates the store; its “cousin” is dead code elimination, which finds unused code—code that cannot affect the result of the program—and eliminates it. With the heavy use of macros, templates, and the similar techniques designed to reuse code in high-level languages, dead code occurs surprisingly often.

151.e6 2.15  Advanced Material: Compiling C and Interpreting Java Compilers must be conservative. The first task of a compiler is to produce correct code; its second task is usually to produce fast code, although other factors, such as code size, may sometimes be important as well. Code that is fast but incorrect—for any possible combination of inputs—is simply wrong. Thus, when we say a compiler is “conservative,” we mean that it performs an optimization only if it knows with 100% certainty that, no matter what the inputs, the code will perform as the user wrote it. Since most compilers translate and optimize one function or procedure at a time, most compilers, especially at lower optimization levels, assume the worst about function calls and about their own parameters. Programmers concerned about the performance of critical loops, especially in real- time or embedded applications, can find themselves staring at the assembly language produced by a compiler and wondering why the compiler failed to perform some global optimization or to allocate a variable to a register throughout a loop. The answer often lies in the dictate that the compiler be conservative. The opportunity for improving the code may seem obvious to the programmer, but then the programmer often has knowledge that the compiler does not have, such as the absence of aliasing between two pointers or the absence of side effects by a function call. The compiler may indeed be able to perform the transformation with a little help, which could eliminate the worst-case behavior that it must assume. This insight also illustrates an important observation: programmers who use pointers to try to improve performance in accessing variables, especially pointers to values on the stack that also have names as variables or as elements of arrays, are likely to disable many compiler optimizations. The result is that the lower-level pointer code may run no better, or perhaps even worse, than the higher-level code optimized by the compiler. Understanding Program Performance Global Code Optimizations Many global code optimizations have the same aims as those used in the local case, including common subexpression elimination, constant propagation, copy propagation, and dead store and dead code elimination. There are two other important global optimizations: code motion and induction variable elimination. Both are loop optimizations; that is, they are aimed at code in loops. Code motion finds code that is loop invariant: a particular piece of code computes the same value on every iteration of the loop and, hence, may be computed once outside the loop. Induction variable elimination is a combination of transformations that reduce overhead on indexing arrays, essentially replacing array indexing with pointer accesses. Rather than examine induction variable elimination in depth, we point the reader to Section 2.14, which compares the use of array indexing and pointers; for most loops, a modern optimizing compiler can perform the transformation from the more obvious array code to the faster pointer code.

 2.15  Advanced Material: Compiling C and Interpreting Java 151.e7 Implementing Local Optimizations Local optimizations are implemented on basic blocks by scanning the basic block in instruction execution order, looking for optimization opportunities. In the assignment statement example on page 150.e6, the duplication of the entire address calculation is recognized by a series of sequential passes over the code. Here is how the process might proceed, including a description of the checks that are needed: 1. Determine that the two addi operations return the same result by observing that the operand x is the same and that the value of its address has not been changed between the two addi operations. 2. Replace all uses of R106 in the basic block by R101. 3. Observe that i cannot change between the two lw instructions that reference it. So replace all uses of R107 with R101. 4. Observe that the mul instructions now have the same input operands, so that R108 may be replaced by R102. 5. Observe that now the two add instructions have identical input operands (R100 and R102), so replace the R109 with R103. 6. Use dead store code elimination to delete the second set of addi,lw, mul, and add instructions since their results are unused. Throughout this process, we need to know when two instances of an operand have the same value. This is easy to determine when they refer to virtual registers, since our intermediate representation uses such registers only once, but the problem can be trickier when the operands are variables in memory, even though we are only considering references within a basic block. It is reasonably easy for the compiler to make the common subexpression elimination determination in a conservative fashion in this case; as we will see in the next subsection, this is more difficult when branches intervene. Implementing Global Optimizations To understand the challenge of implementing global optimizations, let’s consider a few examples: ■ Consider the case of an opportunity for common subexpression elimination, say, of an IR statement like add Rx, R20, R50. To determine whether two such statements compute the same value, we must determine whether the values of R20 and R50 are identical in the two statements. In practice, this means that the values of R20 and R50 have not changed between the first statement and the second. For a single basic block, this is easy to decide; it is more difficult for a more complex program structure involving multiple basic blocks and branches. ■ Consider the second lw of i into R107 within the earlier example: how do we know whether its value is used again? If we consider only a single basic block, 

151.e8 2.15  Advanced Material: Compiling C and Interpreting Java and we know that all uses of R107 are within that block, it is easy to see. As optimization proceeds, however, common subexpression elimination and copy propagation may create other uses of a value. Determining that a value is unused and the code is dead is more difficult in the case of multiple basic blocks. ■ Finally, consider the load of k in our loop, which is a candidate for code motion. In this simple example, we might argue that it is easy to see that k is not changed in the loop and is, hence, loop invariant. Imagine, however, a more complex loop with multiple nestings and if statements within the body. Determining that the load of k is loop invariant is harder in such a case. The information we need to perform these global optimizations is similar: we need to know where each operand in an IR statement could have been changed or defined (use-definition information). The dual of this information is also needed: that is, finding all the uses of that changed operand (definition-use information). Data flow analysis obtains both types of information. Global optimizations and data flow analysis operate on a control flow graph, where the nodes represent basic blocks and the arcs represent control flow between basic blocks. Figure e2.15.4 shows the control flow graph for our simple loop example, with one important transformation introduced. We describe the transformation in the caption, but see if you can discover it, and why it was done, on your own! FIGURE e2.15.4  A control flow graph for the while loop example. Each node represents a basic block, which terminates with a branch or by sequential fall-through into another basic block that is also the target of a branch. The IR statements have been numbered for ease in referring to them. The important transformation performed was to move the while test and conditional branch to the end. This eliminates the unconditional branch that was formerly inside the loop and places it before the loop. This transformation is so important that many compilers do it during the generation of the IR. The mul was also replaced with (“strength-reduced to”) an slli. 9. lw r1, i 10. addi r2, r1, 1 11. sw r2, i 1. addi r3, x0, save 2. lw r4, i 3. slli r5, r4, 2 4. add r6, r5, r3 5. lw r7, 0(r6) 6. lw r8, k 7. beq r7, r8, head

 2.15  Advanced Material: Compiling C and Interpreting Java 151.e9 Suppose we have computed the use-definition information for the control flow graph in Figure e2.15.4. How does this information allow us to perform code motion? Consider IR statements number 1 and 6: in both cases, the use-definition information tells us that there are no definitions (changes) of the operands of these statements within the loop. Thus, these IR statements can be moved outside the loop. Notice that if the addi of save and the lw of k are executed once, just prior to the loop entrance, the computational effect is the same, but the program now runs faster since these two statements are outside the loop. In contrast, consider IR statement 2, which loads the value of i. The definitions of i that affect this statement are both outside the loop, where i is initially defined, and inside the loop in statement 10 where it is stored. Hence, this statement is not loop invariant. Figure e2.15.5 shows the code after performing both code motion and induction variable elimination, which simplifies the address calculation. The variable i can still be register allocated, eliminating the need to load and store it every time, and we will see how this is done in the next subsection. Before we turn to register allocation, we need to mention a caveat that also illustrates the complexity and difficulty of optimizers. Remember that the compiler must be cautious. To be conservative, a compiler must consider the following question: Is there any way that the variable k could possibly ever change in this loop? Unfortunately, there is one way. Suppose that the variable k and the variable i actually refer to the same memory location, which could happen if they were accessed by pointers or reference parameters. FIGURE e2.15.5  The control flow graph showing the representation of the while loop example after code motion and induction variable elimination. The number of instructions in the inner loop has been reduced from 10 to 6. lw r2, i addi r7, r6, 1 addi r4, r4, 4 sw r7, i addi r1, x0, save lw r6, k lw r2, i slli r3, r2, 2 add r4, r3, r1 lw r5, 0(r4) beq r5, r6, head

151.e10 2.15  Advanced Material: Compiling C and Interpreting Java I am sure that many readers are saying, “Well, that would certainly be a stupid piece of code!” Alas, this response is not open to the compiler, which must translate the code as it is written. Recall too that the aliasing information must also be conservative; thus, compilers often find themselves negating optimization opportunities because of a possible alias that exists in one place in the code or because of incomplete information about aliasing. Register Allocation Register allocation is perhaps the most important optimization for modern load-store architectures. Eliminating a load or a store gets rid of an instruction. Furthermore, register allocation enhances the value of other optimizations, such as common subexpression elimination. Fortunately, the trend toward larger register counts in modern architectures has made register allocation simpler and more effective. Register allocation is done on both a local basis and a global basis, that is, across multiple basic blocks but within a single function. Local register allocation is usually done late in compilation, as the final code is generated. Our focus here is on the more challenging and more opportunistic global register allocation. Modern global register allocation uses a region-based approach, where a region (sometimes called a live range) represents a section of code during which a particular variable could be allocated to a particular register. How is a region selected? The process is iterative: 1. Choose a definition (change) of a variable in a given basic block; add that block to the region. 2. Find any uses of that definition, which is a data flow analysis problem; add any basic blocks that contain such uses, as well as any basic block that the value passes through to reach a use, to the region. 3. Find any other definitions that also can affect a use found in the previous step and add the basic blocks containing those definitions, as well as the blocks the definitions pass through to reach a use, to the region. 4. Repeat steps 2 and 3 using the definitions discovered in step 3 until convergence. The set of basic blocks found by this technique has a special property: if the designated variable is allocated to a register in all these basic blocks, then there is no need for loading and storing the variable. Modern global register allocators start by constructing the regions for every virtual register in a function. Once the regions are constructed, the key question is how to allocate a register to each region: the challenge is that certain regions overlap and may not use the same register. Regions that do not overlap (i.e., share no common basic blocks) can share the same register. One way to record the interference among regions is with an interference graph, where each node represents a region, and the arcs between nodes represent that the regions have some basic blocks in common.

 2.15  Advanced Material: Compiling C and Interpreting Java 151.e11 Once an interference graph has been constructed, the problem of allocating registers is equivalent to a famous problem called graph coloring: find a color for each node in a graph such that no two adjacent nodes have the same color. If the number of colors equals the number of registers, then coloring an interference graph is equivalent to allocating a register for each region! This insight was the initial motivation for the allocation method now known as region-based allocation, but originally called the graph-coloring approach. Figure e2.15.6 shows the flow graph representation of the while loop example after register allocation. What happens if the graph cannot be colored using the number of registers available? The allocator must spill registers until it can complete the coloring. By doing the coloring based on a priority function that takes into account the number of memory references saved and the cost of tying up the register, the allocator attempts to avoid spilling for the most important candidates. Spilling is equivalent to splitting up a region (or live range); if the region is split, fewer other regions will interfere with the two separate nodes representing the original region. A process of splitting regions and successive coloring is used to allow the allocation process to complete, at which point all candidates will have been allocated a register. Of course, whenever a region is split, loads and stores must be introduced to get the value from memory or to store it there. The location chosen to split a region must balance the cost of the loads and stores that must be introduced against the advantage of freeing up a register and reducing the number of interferences. FIGURE e2.15.6  The control flow graph showing the representation of the while loop example after code motion and induction variable elimination and register allocation, using the RISC-V register names. The number of IR statements in the inner loop has now dropped to only four from six before register allocation and 10 before any global optimizations. The value of i resides in x12 at the end of the loop and may need to be stored eventually to maintain the program semantics. If i were unused after the loop, not only could the store be avoided, but also the increment inside the loop could be eliminated! addi x12, x12, 1 addi x14, x14, 4 addi x10, x0, save lw x11, k lw x12, i slli x13, x12, 2 add x14, x13, x10 lw x13, 0(x14) beq x13, x11, head

151.e12 2.15  Advanced Material: Compiling C and Interpreting Java Modern register allocators are incredibly effective in using the large register counts available in modern processors. In many programs, the effectiveness of register allocation is limited not by the availability of registers but by the possibilities of aliasing that cause the compiler to be conservative in its choice of candidates. Code Generation The final steps of the compiler are code generation and assembly. Most compilers do not use a stand-alone assembler that accepts assembly language source code; to save time, they instead perform most of the same functions: filling in symbolic values and generating the binary code as the last stage of code generation. In modern processors, code generation is reasonably straightforward, since the simple architectures make the choice of instruction relatively obvious. Code generation is more complex for the more complicated architectures, such as the x86, since multiple IR instructions may collapse into a single machine instruction. In modern compilers, this compilation process uses pattern matching with either a tree-based pattern matcher or a pattern matcher driven by a parser. During code generation, the final stages of machine-dependent optimization are also performed. These include some constant folding optimizations, as well as localized instruction scheduling (see Chapter 4). Optimization Summary Figure e2.15.7 gives examples of typical optimizations, and the last column indicates where the optimization is performed in the gcc compiler. It is sometimes difficult to separate some of the simpler optimizations—local and processor- dependent optimizations—from transformations done in the code generator, and some optimizations are done multiple times, especially local optimizations, which may be performed before and after global optimization as well as during code generation. Today, essentially all programming for desktop and server applications is done in high-level languages, as is most programming for embedded applications. This development means that since most instructions executed are the output of a compiler, an instruction set architecture is mainly a compiler target. It is tempting to add sophisticated operations in an instruction set. The challenge is that they may not exactly match what the compiler needs to produce or may be so general that they aren’t fast. For example, consider special loop instructions found in some computers. Suppose that instead of decrementing by one, the compiler wanted to increment by four, or instead of branching on not equal zero, the compiler wanted to branch if the index was less than or equal to the limit. The loop instruction may be a mismatch. When faced with such objections, the instruction set designer might 

 2.15  Advanced Material: Compiling C and Interpreting Java 151.e13 Elaboration  Some more sophisticated compilers, and many research compilers, use an analysis technique called interprocedural analysis to obtain more information about functions and how they are called. Interprocedural analysis attempts to discover what properties remain true across a function call. For example, we might discover that a function call can never change any global variables, which might be useful in optimizing a loop that calls such a function. Such information is called may-information or flow- insensitive information and can be obtained reasonably efficiently, although analyzing a call to a function F requires analyzing all the functions that F calls, which makes the process somewhat time consuming for large programs. A more costly property to discover is that a function must always change some variable; such information is called must-information or flow-sensitive information. Recall the dictate to be conservative: may-information can never be used as must-information—just because a function may change a variable does not mean that it must change it. It is conservative, however, to use the negation of may-information, so the compiler can rely on the fact that a function will never change a variable in optimizations around the call site of that function. next generalize the operation, adding another operand to specify the increment and perhaps an option on which branch condition to use. Then the danger is that a common case, say, incrementing by one, will be slower than a sequence of simple operations. FIGURE e2.15.7  Major types of optimizations and explanation of each class. The third column shows when these occur at different levels of optimization in gcc. The GNU organization calls the three optimization levels medium (O1), full (O2), and full with integration of small procedures (O3). e d ni r o s s e c o r p ;le v el e cr u o s e h t r a e n r o t A le v el h gi H pendent O y d o b e r u d e c o r p y b lla c e r u d e c o r p e c alp e R n oit a r g e t ni e r u d e c o r P e d o c e nil-t h gia rt s nih ti W la c o L a t u p m o c e m a s e h t f o s e c n a t s ni o w t e c alp e R n oit a ni m ile n ois s e r p x e b u s n o m m o C O y p o c elg nis y b n oit Constant propagation Replace all instances of a variable that is as signed a constant with the constant O1 Stack height reduction Rearrange expression tree to minimize re sources needed for ex pression evaluation O1 h c n a r b a s s o r c A la b ol G Global common subexpression elimi nation O s e h c n a r b s e s s o r c n ois r e v sih t t u b ,la c ol s a e m a S elb air a v a f o s e c n a t s ni lla e c alp e R n oit a g a p o r p y p o C A that has been assigned X (i.e., A = X) with X O2 O p o ol e h t e h t f o n oit a r e ti h c a e e ula v e m a s s e t u p m o c t a h t p o ol a m o rf e d o c e v o m e R n oit o m e d o C Induction variable elimina alu cla c g nis s e r d d a y a rr a e t a ni m ile / yfilp m i S n oit O s p o ol nih ti w s n oit Processor dependent Depends on processor knowledge n o c a y b ylpitlu m e c alp e r ; s elp m a x e y n a M n oit c u d e r h t g n e rt S O s tfih s h ti w t n a t s r e p e nile pip e v o r p m i o t s n oit c u rt s ni r e d r o e R g nilu d e h c s e nile pi P O e c n a m r o f O t e g r a t s e h c a e r t a h t t n e m e c alp sid h c n a r b t s e tr o h s e h t e s o o h C n oit a zi m it p o t e s ff o h c n a r B

151.e14 2.15  Advanced Material: Compiling C and Interpreting Java One of the most important uses of interprocedural analysis is to obtain so- called alias information. An alias occurs when two names may designate the same variable. For example, it is quite helpful to know that two pointers passed to a function may never designate the same variable. Alias information is usually flow- insensitive and must be used conservatively. Interpreting Java This second part of the section is for readers interested in seeing how an object- oriented language like Java executes on an RISC-V architecture. It shows the Java bytecodes used for interpretation and the RISC-V code for the Java version of some of the C segments in prior sections, including Bubble Sort. Let’s quickly review the Java lingo to make sure we are all on the same page. The big idea of object-oriented programming is for programmers to think in terms of abstract objects, and operations are associated with each type of object. New types can often be thought of as refinements to existing types, and so the new types use some operations for the existing types without change. The hope is that the programmer thinks at a higher level, and that code can be reused more readily if the programmer implements the common operations on many different types. This different perspective led to a different set of terms. The type of an object is a class, which is the definition of a new data type together with the operations that are defined to work on that data type. A particular object is then an instance of a class, and creating an object from a class is called instantiation. The operations in a class are called methods, which are similar to C procedures. Rather than call a procedure as in C, you invoke a method in Java. The other members of a class are fields, which correspond to variables in C. Variables inside objects are called instance fields. Rather than access a structure with a pointer, Java uses an object reference to access an object. The syntax for method invocation is x.y, where x is an object reference and y is the method name. The parent–child relationship between older and newer classes is captured by the verb “extends”: a child class extends (or subclasses) a parent class. The child class typically will redefine some of the methods found in the parent to match the new data type. Some methods work fine, and the child class inherits those methods. To reduce the number of errors associated with pointers and explicit memory deallocation, Java automatically frees unused storage, using a separate garbage collector that frees memory when it is full. Hence, new creates a new instance of a dynamic object on the heap, but there is no free in Java. Java also requires array bounds to be checked at runtime to catch another class of errors that can occur in C programs. object-oriented language  A programming language that is oriented around objects rather than actions, or data versus logic.

 2.15  Advanced Material: Compiling C and Interpreting Java 151.e15 Interpretation As mentioned before, Java programs are distributed as Java bytecodes, and the Java Virtual Machine (JVM) executes Java bytecodes. The JVM understands a binary format called the class file format. A class file is a stream of bytes for a single class, containing a table of valid methods with their bytecodes, a pool of constants that acts in part as a symbol table, and other information such as the parent class of this class. When the JVM is first started, it looks for the class method main. To start any Java class, the JVM dynamically loads, links, and initializes a class. The JVM loads a class by first finding the binary representation of the proper class (class file) and then creating a class from that binary representation. Linking combines the class into the runtime state of the JVM so that it can be executed. Finally, it executes the class initialization method that is included in every class. Figure e2.15.8 shows Java bytecodes and their corresponding RISC-V instructions, illustrating five major differences between the two: 1. To simplify compilation, Java uses a stack instead of registers for operands. Operands are pushed on the stack, operated on, and then popped off the stack. 2. The designers of the JVM were concerned about code size, so bytecodes vary in length between one and five bytes, versus the four-byte, fixed-size RISC-V instructions. To save space, the JVM even has redundant instructions of varying lengths whose only difference is size of the immediate. This decision illustrates a code size variation of our third design principle: make the common case small. 3. The JVM has safety features embedded in the architecture. For example, array data transfer instructions check to be sure that the first operand is a reference and that the second index operand is within bounds. 4. To allow garbage collectors to find all live pointers, the JVM uses different instructions to operate on addresses versus integers so that the JVM can know what operands contain addresses. RISC-V generally lumps integers and addresses together. 5. Finally, unlike RISC-V, Java bytecodes include Java-specific instructions that perform complex operations, like allocating an array on the heap or invoking a method.

151.e16 2.15  Advanced Material: Compiling C and Interpreting Java FIGURE e2.15.8  Java bytecode architecture versus RISC-V. Although many bytecodes are simple, those in the last half-dozen rows above are complex and specific to Java. Bytecodes are one to five bytes in length, hence their name. The Java mnemonics uses the prefix i for 32-bit integer, a for reference (address), s for 16-bit integers (short), and b for 8-bit bytes. We use I8 for an 8-bit constant and I16 for a 16-bit constant. RISC-V uses registers for operands, but the JVM uses a stack. The compiler knows the maximum size of the operand stack for each method and simply allocates space for it in the current frame. Here is the notation in the Meaning column: TOS: top of stack; NOS: next position below TOS; NNOS: next position below NOS; pop: remove TOS; pop2: remove TOS and NOS; and push: add a position to the stack. *NOS and *NNOS mean access the memory location pointed to by the address in the stack at those positions. Const[] refers to the runtime constant pool of a class created by the JVM, and Frame[] refers to the variables of the local method frame. The missing Java bytecodes from Figure e2.1 are a few arithmetic and logical operators, some tricky stack management, compares to 0 and branch, support for branch tables, type conversions, more variations of the complex, Java-specific instructions plus operations on floating-point data, 64-bit integers (longs), and 16-bit characters. NOS=TOS+NOS; pop add d d ai d d a Arithmetic NOS=TOS–NOS; pop sub b u si tc a rt b u s Frame[I8a]= Frame[I8a] + I8b addi b I a I c nii t n e m e rc ni Data transfer load local integer/address iload I8/aload I8 lw TOS=Frame[I8] load local integer/address iload_/aload_{0,1,2,3} lw TOS=Frame[{0,1,2,3}] store local integer/address istore I8/astore I8 sw Frame[I8]=TOS; pop load integer/address from array iaload/aaload lw NOS=*NOS[TOS]; pop store integer/address into array iastore/aastore sw *NNOS[NOS]=TOS; pop2 p o p ;] S O T [ S O N * = S O N lh d a ola s y a rr a m o rf fla h d a ol p o p ; S O T = ] S O N [ S O N N * sh e r o t s a s y a rr a o t ni fla h e r o t s p o p ;] S O T [ S O N * = S O N lb d a ola b y a rr a m o rf e ty b d a ol p o p ; S O T = ] S O N [ S O N N * sb e r o t s a b y a rr a o t ni e ty b e r o t s load immediate bipush I8, sipush I16 16, 24 addi push; TOS=I8 or I16 load immediate iconst_{–1,0,1,2,3,4,5} addi push; TOS={–1,0,1,2,3,4,5} p o p ; S O N & S O T = S O N and d n ai d n a la cig o L p o p ; S O N | S O T = S O N or r oi r o p o p ; S O T < < S O N = S O N sll lh si tf el tfih s p o p ; S O T > > S O N = S O N srl r h s ui t h gir tfih s Conditional branch branch on equal if_icompeq I16 beq if TOS == NOS, go to I16; pop2 branch on not equal if_icompne I16 bne if TOS != NOS, go to I16; pop2 p o p ; I o t o g , S O N } = > , > , = < , < { S O T fi blt/bge I } e g,t g, el,tl{ p m o ci_fi e r a p m o c Unconditional jump I o t o g jal I o t o g p m uj jalr n r u t e ri,t e r n r u t e r + C P = S O T ; h s u p ; I o t o g jal I r sj e nit u o r b u s o t p m uj Stack management remove from stack pop, pop2 pop, pop2 S O N = S O T ; h s u p p u d k c a t s n o e t a cilp u d T = S O T ; S O T = S O N ; S O N = T p a w s k c a t s n o s n oitis o p p o t p a w s Safety check check for null reference ifnull I16, ifnotnull I16 if TOS {==,!=} null, go to I16 get length of array arraylength push; TOS = length of array check if object a type instanceof I16 TOS = 1 if TOS matches type of Const[I16]; TOS = 0 otherwise on type Invocation invoke method invokevirtual I16 Invoke method in Const[I16], dispatching Allocation create new class instance new I16 Allocate object type Const[I16] on heap create new array newarray I16 Allocate array type Const[I16] on heap

 2.15  Advanced Material: Compiling C and Interpreting Java 151.e17 Compiling a while Loop in Java Using Bytecodes Compile the while loop from page 95, this time using Java bytecodes: while (save[i] == k)          i += 1; Assume that i, k, and save are the first three local variables. Show the addresses of the bytecodes. The RISC-V version of the C loop in Figure e2.15.3 took six instructions and 24 bytes. How big is the bytecode version? The first step is to put the array reference in save on the stack: 0 aload_3 // Push local variable 3 (save[]) onto stack This 1-byte instruction informs the JVM that an address in local variable 3 is being put on the stack. The 0 on the left of this instruction is the byte address of this first instruction; bytecodes for each method start at 0. The next step is to put the index on the stack: 1 iload_1 // Push local variable 1 (i) onto stack Like the prior instruction, this 1-byte instruction is a short version of a more general instruction that takes 2 bytes to load a local variable onto the stack. The next instruction is to get the value from the array element: 2 iaload // Put array element (save[i]) onto stack This 1-byte instruction checks the prior two operands, pops them off the stack, and then puts the value of the desired array element onto the new top of the stack. Next, we place k on the stack: 3 iload_2 // Push local variable 2 (k) onto stack We are now ready for the while test: 4 if_icompne, Exit // Compare and exit if not equal This 3-byte instruction compares the top two elements of the stack, pops them off the stack, and branches if they are not equal. We are finally prepared for the body of the loop: 7 iinc, 1, 1 // Increment local variable 1 by 1 (i+=1) EXAMPLE ANSWER

151.e18 2.15  Advanced Material: Compiling C and Interpreting Java This unusual 3-byte instruction increments a local variable by 1 without using the operand stack, an optimization that again saves space. Finally, we return to the top of the loop with a 3-byte branch: 10 go to 0 // Go to top of Loop (byte address 0) Thus, the bytecode version takes seven instructions and 13 bytes, just over half the size of the RISC-V C code. (As before, we can optimize this code to branch less.) Compiling for Java Since Java is derived from C and Java has the same built-in types as C, the assignment statement examples in Sections 2.2 to 2.6 are the same in Java as they are in C. The same is true for the if statement example in Section 2.7. The Java version of the while loop is different, however. The designers of C leave it up to the programmers to be sure that their code does not exceed the array bounds. The designers of Java wanted to catch array bound bugs, and thus require the compiler to check for such violations. To check bounds, the compiler needs to know what they are. Java includes an extra word in every array that holds the upper bound. The lower bound is defined as 0. Compiling a while Loop in Java Modify the RISC-V code for the while loop on page 95 to include the array bounds checks that are required by Java. Assume that the length of the array is located just before the first element of the array. Let’s assume that Java arrays reserved the first two words of arrays before the data start. We’ll see the use of the first word soon, but the second word has the array length. Before we enter the loop, let’s load the length of the array into a temporary register: lw  x5, 4(x25)    // Temp reg x5 = length of array save Before we multiply i by 4, we must test to see if it’s less than 0 or greater than the last element of the array. The first step is to check if i is less than 0: Loop: blt  x22, x0, IndexOutOfBounds  // if i<0, goto Error Since the array starts at 0, the index of the last array element is one less than the length of the array. Thus, the test of the upper array bound is to be sure that i is EXAMPLE ANSWER

 2.15  Advanced Material: Compiling C and Interpreting Java 151.e19 less than the length of the array. Thus, the second step is to branch to an error if it’s greater than or equal to length. bge  x22, x5, IndexOutOfBounds  //if i>=length, goto Error The next two lines of the RISC-V while loop are unchanged from the C version: slli x10, x22, 2 // Temp reg x10 = i * 4 add x10, x10, x25 // x10 = address of save[i] We need to account for the first 16 bytes of an array that are reserved in Java. We do that by changing the address field of the load from 0 to 16: lw x9, 8(x10) // Temp reg x9 = save[i] The rest of the RISC-V code from the C while loop is fine as is: bne x9, x24, Exit // go to Exit if save[i] ≠ k addi x22, x22, 1 // i = i + 1 beq x0, x0, Loop // go to Loop Exit: (See the exercises for an optimization of this sequence.) Invoking Methods in Java The compiler picks the appropriate method depending on the type of object. In a few cases, it is unambiguous, and the method can be invoked with no more overhead than a C procedure. In general, however, the compiler knows only that a given variable contains a pointer to an object that belongs to some subtype of a general class. Since it doesn’t know at compile time which subclass the object is, and thus which method should be invoked, the compiler will generate code that first tests to be sure the pointer isn’t null and then uses the code to load a pointer to a table with all the legal methods for that type. The first word of the object has the method table address, which is why Java arrays reserve two words. Let’s say it’s using the fifth method that was declared for that class. (The method order is the same for all subclasses.) The compiler then takes the fifth address from that table and invokes the method at that address. The cost of object orientation in general is that method invocation takes five steps: 1. A conditional branch to be sure that the pointer to the object is valid; 2. A load to get the address of the table of available methods; 3. Another load to get the address of the proper method;

151.e20 2.15  Advanced Material: Compiling C and Interpreting Java 4. Placing a return address into the return register; and finally 5. A branch register to invoke the method. A Sort Example in Java Figure e2.15.9 shows the Java version of exchange sort. A simple difference is that there is no need to pass the length of the array as a separate parameter, since Java arrays include their length: v.length denotes the length of v. A more significant difference is that Java methods are prepended with keywords not found in the C procedures. The sort method is declared public static while swap is declared protected static. Public means that sort can be invoked from any other method, while protected means swap can only be called by other methods within the same package and from methods within derived classes. A static method is another name for a class method—methods that perform class-wide operations and do not apply to an individual object. Static methods are essentially the same as C procedures. This straightforward translation from C into static methods means there is no ambiguity on method invocation, and so it can be just as efficient as C. It also is limited to sorting integers, which means a different sort has to be written for each data type. To demonstrate the object orientation of Java, Figure e2.15.10 shows the new version with the changes highlighted. First, we declare v to be of the type Comparable and replace v[j] > v[j + 1] with an invocation of compareTo. By changing v to this new class, we can use this code to sort many data types. public  A Java keyword that allows a method to be invoked by any other method. protected  A Java key word that restricts invocation of a method to other methods in that package. package  Basically a directory that contains a group of related classes. static method  A method that applies to the whole class rather than to an individual object. It is unrelated to static in C. FIGURE e2.15.9  An initial Java procedure that performs a sort on the array v. Changes from Figures e2.24 and e2.26 are highlighted. public class sort { public static void sort (int[] v) { for (int i = 0; i < v.length; i += 1) { for (int j = i - 1; j >= 0 && v[j] > v[j + 1]; j –= 1) { swap(v, j); } } protected static void swap(int[] v, int k) { int temp = v[k]; v[k] = v[k+1]; v[k+1] = temp; }}

 2.15  Advanced Material: Compiling C and Interpreting Java 151.e21 The method compareTo compares two elements and returns a value greater than 0 if the parameter is larger than the object, 0 if it is equal, and a negative number if it is smaller than the object. These two changes generalize the code so it can sort integers, characters, strings, and so on, if there are subclasses of Comparable with each of these types and if there is a version of compareTo for each type. For pedagogic purposes, we redefine the class Comparable and the method compareTo here to compare integers. The actual definition of Comparable in the Java library is considerably different. Starting from the RISC-V code that we generated for C, we show what changes we made to create the RISC-V code for Java. For swap, the only significant differences are that we must check to be sure the object reference is not null and that each array reference is within bounds. The first test checks that the address in the first parameter is not zero: swap: beq x10, x0, Error  x10, NullPointer  // if X0==0,goto Error FIGURE e2.15.10  A revised Java procedure that sorts on the array v that can take on more types. Changes from Figure e2.15.9 are highlighted. public class sort { public static void sort (Comparable[] v) { for (int i = 0; i < v.length; i += 1) { for (int j = i – 1; j >= 0 && v[j].compareTo(v[j + 1]); j –= 1) { swap(v, j); } } protected static void swap(Comparable[] v, int k) { Comparable temp = v[k]; v[k] = v[k+1]; v[k+1] = temp; }} public class Comparable { public int(compareTo (int x) { return value – x; } public int value; }

151.e22 2.15  Advanced Material: Compiling C and Interpreting Java Next, we load the length of v into a register and check that index k is OK. lw x5, 4(x10) // Temp reg x5 = length of array v blt x11, x0, IndexOutOfBounds // if k < 0, goto Error bge x11, x5, IndexOutOfBounds // if k >= length, goto Error This check is followed by a check that k+1 is within bounds. addi x6,x11,1 // Temp reg x6 = k+1 blt x6, x0, IndexOutOfBounds // if k+1 < 0, goto Error bge x6, x5, IndexOutOfBounds // if k+1 >= length, goto Error Figure e2.15.11 highlights the extra RISC-V instructions in swap that a Java compiler might produce. We again must adjust the offset in the load and store to account for two words reserved for the method table and length. Figure e2.15.12 shows the method body for those new instructions for sort. (We can take the saving, restoring, and return from Figure e2.28.) The first test is again to make sure the pointer to v is not null: beq  x10, x0, Error     // if x10==0,goto Error FIGURE e2.15.11  RISC-V assembly code of the procedure swap in Figure e2.24. swap: beq x10, x0, NullPointer # If x10==0, goto Error lw x5, 4(x10) # Temp reg x5 = length of array v # If k < 0, goto Error blt x11, x0, IndexOutOfBounds # If k >= length, goto Error bge x11, x5, IndexOutOfBounds # Temp reg x6 = k+1 addi x6, x11, 1 # If k+1 < 0, goto Error blt x6, x0, IndexOutOfBounds bge x6, x5, IndexOutOfBOunds # If k+1 >= length, goto Error slli x11, x11, 2 # reg X11 = k * 4 add x11, x11, x10 # reg X11 = v + (k * 4) lw x12, 0(x11) # reg x12 = v[k] lw x13, 4(x11) # reg x13 = v[k+1] sw x13, 0(x11) # v[k] = reg x13 sw x12, 4(x11) # v[k+1] = reg x12 jalr x0,0(x1) # return to calling routine

 2.15  Advanced Material: Compiling C and Interpreting Java 151.e23 Next, we load the length of the array (we use register x22 to keep it similar to the code for the C version of sort): lw x22, 4(x10) // x22 = length of array v Now we must ensure that the index is within bounds. Since the first test of the inner loop is to test if j is negative, we can skip that initial bound test. That leaves the test for too big: bge x20, x22, IndexOutOfBounds // if j > = length, goto Error FIGURE e2.15.12  RISC-V assembly version of the method body of the Java version of sort. The new code is highlighted in this figure. We must still add the code to save and restore registers and the return from the RISC-V code found in Figure e2.27. To keep the code similar to that figure, we load v.length into x22 instead of into a temporary register. To reduce the number of lines of code, we make the simplifying assumption that compareTo is a leaf procedure and we do not need to push registers to be saved on the stack. Move parameters # Copy parameter x10 into x21 addi x21, x10, 0 Test ptr null beq x10, x0, NullPointer # If x10==0, goto Error Get array length # x22 = length of array v lw x22, 4(x10) Outer loop head # i = 0 addi x19, x0, 0 for1tst: bge x19, x22, exit1 # If i >= length, go to exit1 Inner loop head addi x20, x19, -1 # j = i - 1 for2tst: blt x20, x0, exit1 # If j < 0, goto exit2 Test if j too big bge x20, x22, IndexOutOfBounds # If j >= length, goto error Get v[j] slli x5, x20, 2 # x5 = j * 4 add x5, x21, x5 # x5 = v + (j * 4) lw x6, 0(x5) # x6 = v[j] Test if j+1 < 0 or too big # x7 = j + 1 addi x7, x20, 1 blt x7, x0, IndexOutOfBounds # If j + 1 < 0, goto Error bge x7, x22, IndexOutOfBounds # If j + 1 >= length, goto Error Get v[j+1] lw x7, 4(x5) # x7 = v[j+1] Load method table # x28 = address of method table lw x28, 0(x10) Get method address # x28 = address of third method lw x28, 8(x28) Pass parameters # 1st parameter is v[j] addi x10, x6, 0 # 2nd parameter is v[j+1] addi x11, x7, 0 Call method indirectly # Call compareTo jalr x1, 0(x28) Test if should skip swap ble x10, x0, exit2 # If result <= 0, skip swap Pass parameters and call swap # 1st parameter is v addi x10, x21, 0 # 2nd parameter is j addi x11, x20, 0 # Invoke swap routine (Figure 2.34) jal x1, swap Inner loop end addi x20,x20,-1 # j -= 1 jal x0, for2tst # Go to for2tst Outer loop end exit2: for2tst: addi x19,x19,1 # i += 1 jal x0, for1tst # Go to for1tst

151.e24 2.15  Advanced Material: Compiling C and Interpreting Java The code for testing j + 1 is quite similar to the code for checking k + 1 in swap, so we skip it here. The key difference is the invocation of compareTo. We first load the address of the table of legal methods, which we assume is two words before the beginning of the array: lw x28, 0(x10) // x28 = address of method table Given the address of the method table for this object, we then get the desired method. Let’s assume compareTo is the third method in the Comparable class. To pick the address of the third method, we load that address into a temporary register: lw  x28, 8(x28)    // x28 = address of third method We are now ready to call compareTo. The next step is to save the necessary registers on the stack. Fortunately, we don’t need the temporary registers or argument registers after the method invocation, so there is nothing to save. Thus, we simply pass the parameters for compareTo: addi x10, x6, 0 // 1st parameter of compareTo is v[j] addi x11, x7, 0 // 2nd parameter of compareTo is v[j+1] Then, we use the jump-and-link register to invoke compareTo: jalr  x1, 0(x28)  // invoke compareTo, and save return address in x1 The method returns, with x10 determining which of the two elements is larger. If x10 > 0, then v[j] >v[j+1], and we need to swap. Thus, to skip the swap, we need to test if x10 ≤ 0: ble x10, x0, exit2 // go to exit2 if v[j] ≤ v[j+1] The RISC-V code for compareTo is left as an exercise. The main changes for the Java versions of sort and swap are testing for null object references and index out-of-bounds errors, and the extra method invocation to give a more general compare. This method invocation is more expensive than a C procedure call, since it requires, a conditional branch, a pair of chained loads, and an indirect branch. As we see in Chapter  4, dependent loads and indirect branches can be relatively slow on modern processors. The increasing popularity of Java suggests that many programmers today are willing to leverage the high performance of modern processors to pay for error checking and code reuse. Hardware/ Software Interface

 2.15  Advanced Material: Compiling C and Interpreting Java 151.e25 Elaboration  Although we test each reference to j and j + 1 to be sure that these indices are within bounds, an assembly language programmer might look at the code and reason as follows: 1. The inner for loop is only executed if j ≤ 0 and since j + 1 > j, there is no need to test j + 1 to see if it is less than 0. 2. Since i takes on the values, 0, 1, 2, …, (data.length − 1) and since j takes on the values i − 1, i − 2, …, 2, 1, 0, there is no need to test if j ≤ data.length since the largest value j can be is data.length − 2. 3. Following the same reasoning, there is no need to test whether j + 1 ≤ data.length since the largest value of j+1 is data.length − 1. There are coding tricks in the rest of Chapter 2 and superscalar execution in Chapter 4 that lower the effective cost of such bounds checking, but only high optimizing compilers can reason this way. Note that if the compiler inlined the swap method into sort, many checks would be unnecessary. Elaboration  Look carefully at the code for swap in Figure e2.15.11. See anything wrong in the code, or at least in the explanation of how the code works? It implicitly assumes that each Comparable element in v is 4 bytes long. Surely, you need much more than 4 bytes for a complex subclass of Comparable, which could contain any number of fields. Surprisingly, this code does work, because an important property of Java’s semantics forces the use of the same, small representation for all variables, fields, and array elements that belong to Comparable or its subclasses. Java types are divided into primitive types—the predefined types for numbers, characters, and Booleans—and reference types—the built-in classes like String, user-defined classes, and arrays. Values of reference types are pointers (also called references) to anonymous objects that are themselves allocated in the heap. For the programmer, this means that assigning one variable to another does not create a new object, but instead makes both variables refer to the same object. Because these objects are anonymous, and programs therefore have no way to refer to them directly, a program must use indirection through a variable to read or write any objects’ fields (variables). Thus, because the data structure allocated for the array v consists entirely of pointers, it is safe to assume they are all the same size, and the same swapping code works for all of Comparable’s subtypes. To write sorting and swapping functions for arrays of primitive types requires that we write new versions of the functions, one for each type. This replication is for two reasons. First, primitive type values do not include the references to dispatching tables that we used on Comparables to determine at runtime how to compare values. Second, primitive values come in different sizes: 1, 2, 4, or 8 bytes. The pervasive use of pointers in Java is elegant in its consistency, with the penalty being a level of indirection and a requirement that objects be allocated on the heap. Furthermore, in any language where the lifetimes of the heap-allocated anonymous objects are independent of the lifetimes of the named variables, fields, and array elements that reference them, programmers must deal with the problem of deciding when it is safe to deallocate heap-allocated storage. Java’s designers chose to use 

151.e26 2.15  Advanced Material: Compiling C and Interpreting Java garbage collection. Of course, use of garbage collection rather than explicit user memory management also improves program safety. C++ provides an interesting contrast. Although programmers can write essentially the same pointer-manipulating solution in C++, there is another option. In C++, programmers can elect to forgo the level of indirection and directly manipulate an array of objects, rather than an array of pointers to those objects. To do so, C++ programmers would typically use the template capability, which allows a class or function to be parameterized by the type of data on which it acts. Templates, however, are compiled using the equivalent of macro expansion. That is, if we declared an instance of sort capable of sorting types X and Y, C++ would create two copies of the code for the class: one for sort<X> and one for sort<Y>, each specialized accordingly. This solution increases code size in exchange for making comparison faster (since the function calls would not be indirect, and might even be subject to inline expansion). Of course, the speed advantage would be canceled if swapping the objects required moving large amounts of data instead of just single pointers. As always, the best design depends on the details of the problem.

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer performance. Keep in mind that the subject of compiler construction is usually taught in a one- or two-semester course, so our introduction will necessarily only touch on the basics. The second part of this section is for readers interested in seeing how an object- oriented language like Java executes on an RISC-V architecture. It shows the Java byte-codes used for interpretation and the RISC-V code for the Java version of some of the C segments in prior sections, including Bubble Sort. It covers both the Java Virtual Machine and JIT compilers. The rest of Section 2.15 can be found online. 2.16 Real Stuff: MIPS Instructions The instruction set most similar to RISC-V, MIPS, also originated in academia, but is now owned by Wave Computing. MIPS and RISC-V share the same design philosophy, despite MIPS being 25 years more senior than RISC-V. The good news is that if you know RISC-V, it will be very easy to pick up MIPS. To show their similarity, Figure 2.29 compares instruction formats for RISC-V and MIPS. The MIPS ISA has both 32-bit address and 64-bit address versions, sensibly called MIPS-32 and MIPS-64. These instruction sets are virtually identical except for the larger address size needing 64-bit registers instead of 32-bit registers. Here are the common features between RISC-V and MIPS: n All instructions are 32 bits wide for both architectures. n Both have 32 general-purpose registers, with one register being hardwired to 0. n The only way to access memory is via load and store instructions on both architectures. n Unlike some architectures, there are no instructions that can load or store many registers in MIPS or RISC-V. n Both have instructions that branch if a register is equal to zero and branch if a register is not equal to zero. n Both sets of addressing modes work for all word sizes. One of the main differences between RISC-V and MIPS is for conditional branches other than equal or not equal. Whereas RISC-V simply provides branch instructions to compare two registers, MIPS relies on a comparison instruction that sets a register to 0 or 1 depending on whether the comparison is true. Programmers then follow that comparison instruction with a branch on equal to or not equal to zero depending on the desired outcome of the comparison. Keeping with its minimalist philosophy, MIPS only performs less than comparisons, leaving it up to the programmer to switch order of operands or to switch the condition being tested by the branch to get all the desired outcomes. MIPS has both signed and unsigned versions of the set on less than instructions: slt and sltu. object-oriented language  A programming language that is oriented around objects rather than actions, or data versus logic.

 2.17  Real Stuff: ARMv7 (32-bit) Instructions When we look beyond the core instructions that are most commonly used, the other main difference is that the full MIPS is a much larger instruction set than RISC-V, as we shall see in Section 2.20. 2.17 Real Stuff: ARMv7 (32-bit) Instructions ARM is the most popular instruction set architecture for embedded devices, with more than 100 billion devices through 2016. Standing originally for Acorn Machine, the name was later changed to Advanced RISC Machine, ARM came FIGURE 2.29  Instruction formats of ARM, RISC-V, and MIPS. The differences result from whether the architecture has 16 registers like ARM or 32 registers like MIPS and RISC-V. Register-register ARM ARM ARM MIPS MIPS MIPS 28 27 20 19 16 15 12 11 4 3 Opx4 Op8 Rs14 Rs24 Rd4 Opx8 26 25 21 20 16 15 11 10 6 5 Op6 Rs15 Rs25 Rd5 Opx6 Const5 20 19 25 24 12 11 7 6 funct77 Rs25 Rs15 funct33 opsode7 Rd5 20 19 12 11 7 6 immediate12 Rs15 funct33 opsode7 Rd5 26 25 16 15 Op6 Rs15 Rd5 Const16 26 25 16 15 Op6 Rs15 Rd5 Const16 28 27 20 19 16 15 12 11 Opx4 Op8 Rs14 Rd4 Const12 28 27 20 19 16 15 12 11 Opx4 Op8 Rs14 Rd4 Const12 RISC-V Load Store RISC-V 20 19 25 24 12 11 7 6 immediate7 Rs15 funct33 opsode7 immediate5 Rs25 RISC-V

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer out the same year as MIPS and followed similar philosophies. Figure 2.30 lists the similarities between ARM and RISC-V. The principal difference is that RISC-V has more registers and ARM has more addressing modes. There is a similar core of instruction sets for arithmetic–logical and data transfer instructions for MIPS and ARM, as Figure 2.31 shows. Addressing Modes Figure 2.32 shows the data-addressing modes supported by ARM. Unlike RISC-V, ARM does not reserve a register to contain 0. Although RISC-V has just three simple data-addressing modes (see Figure 2.18), ARM has nine, including fairly complex calculations. For example, ARM has an addressing mode that can shift one register by any amount, add it to the other registers to form the address, and then update one register with this new address. Compare and Conditional Branch RISC-V uses the contents of registers to evaluate conditional branches. ARM uses the traditional four condition code bits stored in the program status word: negative, FIGURE 2.30  Similarities in ARM and RISC-V instruction sets. Source/destination operand type Second source operand Register Register Register Immediate Register Memory Memory Register Memory Immediate FIGURE 2.31  ARM register–register and data transfer instructions equivalent to the RISC-V core. Dashes mean the operation is not available in that architecture or not synthesized in a few instructions. If there are several choices of instructions equivalent to the RISC-V core, they are separated by commas. ARM includes shifts as part of every data operation instruction, so a shift with superscript 1 is just a variation of a move instruction, such as lsr1. Note that ARM has no divide instruction. Description Register restrictions RISC-V equivalent Address is in a register. Not ESP or EBP ld x10, 0(x11) Address is contents of base register plus displacement. Not ESP ld x10, 40(x11) The address is Base + (2Scale× Index) where Scale has the value 0, 1, 2, or 3. Base: any GPR Index: not ESP slli x12, x12, 3 add x11, x11, x12 ld x10, 0(x11) The address is Base + (2Scale× Index) + Displacement where Scale has the value 0, 1, 2, or 3. Base: any GPR Index: not ESP slli x12, x12, 3 add x11, x11, x12 ld x10, 40(x11) Mode Register indirect Based mode with 8- or 32-bit displacement Base plus scaled index Base plus scaled index with 8- or 32-bit displacement

 2.17  Real Stuff: ARMv7 (32-bit) Instructions zero, carry, and overflow. They can be set on any arithmetic or logical instruction; unlike earlier architectures, this setting is optional on each instruction. An explicit option leads to fewer problems in a pipelined implementation. ARM uses conditional branches to test condition codes to determine all possible unsigned and signed relations. CMP subtracts one operand from the other, and the difference sets the condition codes. Compare negative (CMN) adds one operand to the other, and the sum sets the condition codes. TST performs logical AND on the two operands to set all condition codes but overflow, while TEQ uses exclusive OR to set the first three condition codes. One unusual feature of ARM is that every instruction has the option of executing conditionally depending on the condition codes. Every instruction starts with a 4-bit field that determines whether it will act as a no-operation instruction (nop) or real instruction depending on the condition codes. Hence, conditional branches are properly considered as conditionally executing the unconditional branch instruction. Conditional execution allows for avoiding a branch to jump over a single instruction. It takes less code space and time to simply conditionally execute one instruction. Figure 2.29 shows the instruction formats for ARM and MIPS. The principal differences are the 4-bit conditional execution field in every instruction and the smaller register field, because ARM has half the number of registers. Unique Features of ARM Figure 2.33 shows a few arithmetic–logical instructions not found in MIPS. Since ARM does not have a dedicated register for 0, it has separate opcodes to perform some operations that MIPS can do with $zero. In addition, ARM has support for multiword arithmetic. FIGURE 2.32  Summary of data-addressing modes. ARM has separate register indirect and register + off set addressing modes rather than just putting 0 in the offset of the latter mode. To get greater addressing range, ARM shifts the offset left 1 or 2 bits if the data size is a halfword or word. Instruction Function je name if equal(condition code) {EIP=name}; EIP–128 <= name < EIP+128 jmp name EIP=name call name SP=SP–4; M[SP]=EIP+5; EIP=name; movw EBX,[EDI+45] EBX=M[EDI+45] push ESI SP=SP–4; M[SP]=ESI pop EDI EDI=M[SP]; SP=SP+4 add EAX,#6765 EAX= EAX+6765 test EDX,#42 Set condition code (ﬂ ags) with EDX and 42 movsl M[EDI]=M[ESI]; EDI=EDI+4; ESI=ESI+4

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer FIGURE 2.33  ARM arithmetic/logical instructions not found in MIPS. a. JE EIP + displacement b. CALL c. MOV EBX, [EDI + 45] d. PUSH ESI e. ADD EAX, #6765 f. TEST EDX, #42 Immediate Postbyte TEST ADD PUSH MOV CALL JE w w Immediate Reg Reg w d Displacement r/m Postbyte Offset Displacement Condi- tion 1 1 ARM’s 12-bit immediate field has a novel interpretation. The eight least significant bits are zero-extended to a 32-bit value, then rotated right the number of bits specified in the first four bits of the field multiplied by two. One advantage is that this scheme can represent all powers of two in a 32-bit word. Whether this split actually catches more immediates than a simple 12-bit field would be an interesting study. Operand shifting is not limited to immediates. The second register of all arithmetic and logical processing operations has the option of being shifted before being operated on. The shift options are shift left logical, shift right logical, shift right arithmetic, and rotate right. ARM also has instructions to save groups of registers, called block loads and stores. Under control of a 16-bit mask within the instructions, any of the 16 registers 

 2.18  Real Stuff: ARMv8 (64-bit) Instructions can be loaded or stored into memory in a single instruction. These instructions can save and restore registers on procedure entry and return. These instructions can also be used for block memory copy and reduce code size on procedure entry and exit. 2.18 Real Stuff: ARMv8 (64-bit) Instructions Of the many potential problems in an instruction set, the one that is almost impossible to overcome is having too small a memory address. While the x86 was successfully extended first to 32-bit addresses and later to 64-bit addresses, many of its brethren were left behind. For example, the 16-bit address MOStek 6502 powered the Apple II, but even given this head start with the first commercially successful personal computer, its lack of address bits condemned it to the dustbin of history. ARM architects could see the writing on the wall of their 32-bit address computer and began design of the 64-bit address version of ARM in 2007. It was finally revealed in 2013. Rather than some minor cosmetic changes to make all the registers 64 bits wide, which is basically what happened to the x86, ARM did a complete overhaul. The good news is that if you know MIPS it will be very easy to pick up ARMv8, as the 64-bit version is called. First, compared with RISC-V, ARM dropped virtually all of the unusual features of v7: n There is no conditional execution field as there was in nearly every instruction in v7. n The immediate field is simply a 12-bit constant rather than essentially an input to a function that produces a constant as in v7. n ARM dropped Load Multiple and Store Multiple instructions. n The PC is no longer one of the registers, which resulted in unexpected branches if you wrote to it. Second, ARM added missing features that are useful in MIPS: n V8 has 32 general-purpose registers, which compiler writers surely love. Like MIPS, one register is hardwired to 0, although in load and store instructions it instead refers to the stack pointer. n Its addressing modes work for all word sizes in ARMv8, which was not the case in ARMv7. n It includes a divide instruction, which was omitted from ARMv7. n It adds the equivalent of MIPS branch if equal and branch if not equal.

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer Beauty is altogether in the eye of the beholder. Margaret Wolfe Hungerford, Molly Bawn, 1877 As the philosophy of the v8 instruction set is much closer to that of RISC-V than to v7, our conclusion is that the main similarity between ARMv7 and ARMv8 is the name. 2.19 Real Stuff: x86 Instructions Designers of instruction sets sometimes provide more powerful operations than those found in RISC-V and MIPS. The goal is generally to reduce the number of instructions executed by a program. The danger is that this reduction can occur at the cost of simplicity, increasing the time a program takes to execute because the instructions are slower. This slowness may be the result of a slower clock cycle time or of requiring more clock cycles than a simpler sequence. The path toward operation complexity is thus fraught with peril. Section 2.21 demonstrates the pitfalls of complexity. Evolution of the Intel x86 RISC-V and MIPS were the vision of single groups working at the same time; the pieces of these architectures fit nicely together. Such is not the case for the x86; it is the product of several independent groups who evolved the architecture over almost 40 years, adding new features to the original instruction set as someone might add clothing to a packed bag. Here are important x86 milestones. n 1978: The Intel 8086 architecture was announced as an assembly language- compatible extension of the then-successful Intel 8080, an 8-bit microprocessor. The 8086 is a 16-bit architecture, with all internal registers 16 bits wide. Unlike RISC-V, the registers have dedicated uses, and hence the 8086 is not considered a general-purpose register (GPR) architecture. n 1980: The Intel 8087 floating-point coprocessor is announced. This architec­ ture extends the 8086 with about 60 floating-point instructions. Instead of using registers, it relies on a stack (see Section 2.24 and Section 3.7). n 1982: The 80286 extended the 8086 architecture by increasing the address space to 24 bits, by creating an elaborate memory-mapping and protection model (see Chapter 5), and by adding a few instructions to round out the instruction set and to manipulate the protection model. n 1985: The 80386 extended the 80286 architecture to 32 bits. In addition to a 32- bit architecture with 32-bit registers and a 32-bit address space, the 80386 added new addressing modes and additional operations. The expanded instructions make the 80386 nearly a general-purpose register machine. The 80386 also added paging support in addition to segmented addressing (see Chapter 5). Like the 80286, the 80386 has a mode to execute 8086 programs without change. general-purpose register (GPR)  A register that can be used for addresses or for data with virtually any instruction.

 2.19  Real Stuff: x86 Instructions n 1989–95: The subsequent 80486 in 1989, Pentium in 1992, and Pentium Pro in 1995 were aimed at higher performance, with only four instructions added to the user-visible instruction set: three to help with multiprocessing (see Chapter 6) and a conditional move instruction. n 1997: After the Pentium and Pentium Pro were shipping, Intel announced that it would expand the Pentium and the Pentium Pro architectures with MMX (Multi Media Extensions). This new set of 57 instructions uses the floating- point stack to accelerate multimedia and communication applications. MMX instructions typically operate on multiple short data elements at a time, in the tradition of single instruction, multiple data (SIMD) architectures (see Chapter 6). Pentium II did not introduce any new instructions. n 1999: Intel added another 70 instructions, labeled SSE (Streaming SIMD Extensions) as part of Pentium III. The primary changes were to add eight separate registers, double their width to 128 bits, and add a single precision floating-point data type. Hence, four 32-bit floating-point operations can be performed in parallel. To improve memory performance, SSE includes cache prefetch instructions plus streaming store instructions that bypass the caches and write directly to memory (see Chapter 5). n 2001: Intel added yet another 144 instructions, this time labeled SSE2. The new data type is double precision arithmetic, which allows pairs of 64-bit floating-point operations in parallel. Almost all of these 144 instructions are versions of existing MMX and SSE instructions that operate on 64 bits of data in parallel. Not only does this change enable more multimedia operations; it gives the compiler a different target for floating-point operations than the unique stack architecture. Compilers can choose to use the eight SSE registers as floating-point registers like those found in other computers. This change boosted the floating-point performance of the Pentium 4, the first microprocessor to include SSE2 instructions. n 2003: A company other than Intel enhanced the x86 architecture this time. AMD announced a set of architectural extensions to increase the address space from 32 to 64 bits. Similar to the transition from a 16- to 32-bit address space in 1985 with the 80386, AMD64 widens all registers to 64 bits. It also increases the number of registers to 16 and increases the number of 128-bit SSE registers to 16. The primary ISA change comes from adding a new mode called long mode that redefines the execution of all x86 instructions with 64-bit addresses and data. To address the larger number of registers, it adds a new prefix to instructions. Depending how you count, long mode also adds four to 10 new instructions and drops 27 old ones. PC-relative data addressing is another extension. AMD64 still has a mode that is identical to x86 (legacy mode) plus a mode that restricts user programs to x86 but allows operating systems to use AMD64 (compatibility mode). These modes allowed a more graceful transition to 64-bit addressing than the HP/Intel IA-64 architecture.

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer n 2004: Intel capitulates and embraces AMD64, relabeling it Extended Memory 64 Technology (EM64T). The major difference is that Intel added a 128-bit atomic compare and swap instruction, which probably should have been included in AMD64. At the same time, Intel announced another generation of media extensions. SSE3 adds 13 instructions to support complex arithmetic, graphics operations on arrays of structures, video encoding, floating-point conversion, and thread synchronization (see Section 2.11). AMD added SSE3 in subsequent chips and the missing atomic swap instruction to AMD64 to maintain binary compatibility with Intel. n 2006: Intel announces 54 new instructions as part of the SSE4 instruction set extensions. These extensions perform tweaks like sum of absolute differences, dot products for arrays of structures, sign or zero extension of narrow data to wider sizes, population count, and so on. They also added support for virtual machines (see Chapter 5). n 2007: AMD announces 170 instructions as part of SSE5, including 46 instructions of the base instruction set that adds three operand instructions like RISC-V. n 2011: Intel ships the Advanced Vector Extension that expands the SSE register width from 128 to 256 bits, thereby redefining about 250 instructions and adding 128 new instructions. n 2015: Intel ships AVX-512, which widens the registers and operations from 256 bits to 512 bits, and once again redefining hundreds of instructions as well as adding many more. This history illustrates the impact of the “golden handcuffs” of compatibility on the x86, as the existing software base at each step was too important to jeopardize with significant architectural changes. Whatever the artistic failures of the x86, keep in mind that this instruction set largely drove the PC generation of computers and still dominates the Cloud portion of the post-PC era. Manufacturing 250M x86 chips per year may seem small compared to billions of ARM chips, but many companies would love to control such a market. Nevertheless, this checkered ancestry has led to an architecture that is difficult to since the chips are much more expensive explain and impossible to love. Brace yourself for what you are about to see! Do not try to read this section with the care you would need to write x86 programs; the goal instead is to give you familiarity with the strengths and weaknesses of the world’s most popular desktop architecture. Rather than show the entire 16-bit, 32-bit, and 64-bit instruction sets, in this section we concentrate on the 32-bit subset that originated with the 80386. We start our explanation with the registers and addressing modes, move on to the integer operations, and conclude with an examination of instruction encoding.

 2.19  Real Stuff: x86 Instructions x86 Registers and Data Addressing Modes The registers of the 80386 show the evolution of the instruction set (Figure 2.34). The 80386 extended all 16-bit registers (except the segment registers) to 32 bits, prefixing an E to their name to indicate the 32-bit version. We’ll refer to them generically as GPRs (general-purpose registers). The 80386 contains only eight GPRs. This means RISC-V and MIPS programs can use four times as many. Figure 2.35 shows the arithmetic, logical, and data transfer instructions are two-operand instructions. There are two important differences here. The x86 arithmetic and logical instructions must have one operand act as both a source and a destination; RISC-V and MIPS allow separate registers for source and FIGURE 2.34  The 80386 register set. Starting with the 80386, the top eight registers were extended to 32 bits and could also be used as general-purpose registers. GPR 0 GPR 1 GPR 2 GPR 3 GPR 4 GPR 5 GPR 6 GPR 7 Code segment pointer Stack segment pointer (top of stack) Data segment pointer 0 Data segment pointer 1 Data segment pointer 2 Data segment pointer 3 Instruction pointer (PC) Condition codes Use Name EAX ECX EDX EBX ESP EBP ESI EDI CS SS DS ES FS GS EIP EFLAGS

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer destination. This restriction puts more pressure on the limited registers, since one source register must be modified. The second important difference is that one of the operands can be in memory. Thus, virtually any instruction may have one operand in memory, unlike RISC-V and MIPS. Data memory-addressing modes, described in detail below, offer two sizes of addresses within the instruction. These so-called displacements can be 8 bits or 32 bits. Although a memory operand can use any addressing mode, there are restrictions on which registers can be used in a mode. Figure 2.36 shows the x86 addressing modes and which GPRs cannot be used with each mode, as well as how to get the same effect using RISC-V instructions. FIGURE 2.35  Instruction types for the arithmetic, logical, and data transfer instructions. The x86 allows the combinations shown. The only restriction is the absence of a memory-memory mode. Immediates may be 8, 16, or 32 bits in length; a register is any one of the 14 major registers in Figure 2.33 (not EIP or EFLAGS). FIGURE 2.36  x86 32-bit addressing modes with register restrictions and the equivalent RISC-V code. The Base plus Scaled Index addressing mode, not found in RISC-V or MIPS, is included to avoid the multiplies by 4 (scale factor of 2) to turn an index in a register into a byte address (see Figures 2.26 and 2.28). A scale factor of 1 is used for 16-bit data, and a scale factor of 2 for 32-bit data. A scale factor of 0 means the address is not scaled. If the displacement is longer than 12 bits in the second or fourth modes, then the RISC-V equivalent mode would need more instructions, usually a lui to load bits 12 through 31 of the displacement, followed by an add to sum these bits with the base register. (Intel gives two different names to what is called Based addressing mode—Based and Indexed—but they are essentially identical and we combine them here.)

 2.19  Real Stuff: x86 Instructions x86 Integer Operations The 8086 provides support for both 8-bit (byte) and 16-bit (word) data types. The 80386 adds 32-bit addresses and data (doublewords) in the x86. (AMD64 adds 64-bit addresses and data, called quad words; we’ll stick to the 80386 in this section.) The data type distinctions apply to register operations as well as memory accesses. Almost every operation works on both 8-bit data and on one longer data size. That size is determined by the mode and is either 16 bits or 32 bits. Clearly, some programs want to operate on data of all three sizes, so the 80386 architects provided a convenient way to specify each version without expanding code size significantly. They decided that either 16-bit or 32-bit data dominate most programs, and so it made sense to be able to set a default large size. This default data size is set by a bit in the code segment register. To override the default data size, an 8-bit prefix is attached to the instruction to tell the machine to use the other large size for this instruction. The prefix solution was borrowed from the 8086, which allows multiple prefixes to modify instruction behavior. The three original prefixes override the default segment register, lock the bus to support synchronization (see Section 2.11), or repeat the following instruction until the register ECX counts down to 0. This last prefix was intended to be paired with a byte move instruction to move a variable number of bytes. The 80386 also added a prefix to override the default address size. The x86 integer operations can be divided into four major classes: 1. Data movement instructions, including move, push, and pop. 2. Arithmetic and logic instructions, including test, integer, and decimal arithmetic operations. 3. Control flow, including conditional branches, unconditional branches, calls, and returns. 4. String instructions, including string move and string compare. The first two categories are unremarkable, except that the arithmetic and logic instruction operations allow the destination to be either a register or a memory location. Figure 2.37 shows some typical x86 instructions and their functions. Conditional branches on the x86 are based on condition codes or flags. Condition codes are set as a side effect of an operation; most are used to compare the value of a result to 0. Branches then test the condition codes. PC-relative branch addresses must be specified in the number of bytes, since unlike RISC-V and MIPS, 80386 instructions have no alignment restriction. String instructions are part of the 8080 ancestry of the x86 and are not commonly executed in most programs. They are often slower than equivalent software routines (see the Fallacy on page 170). Figure 2.38 lists some of the integer x86 instructions. Many of the instructions are available in both byte and word formats.

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer FIGURE 2.37  Some typical x86 instructions and their functions. A list of frequent operations appears in Figure 2.41. The CALL saves the EIP of the next instruction on the stack. (EIP is the Intel PC.) Instruction Meaning Control Conditional and unconditional branches jnz, jz Jump if condition to EIP + 8-bit offset; JNE (for JNZ), JE (for JZ) are alternative names jmp Unconditional jump—8-bit or 16-bit offset call Subroutine call—16-bit offset; return address pushed onto stack ret Pops return address from stack and jumps to it loop Loop branch—decrement ECX; jump to EIP + 8-bit displacement if ECX ≠0 Data transfer Move data between registers or between register and memory move Move between two registers or between register and memory push, pop Push source operand on stack; pop operand from stack top to a register les Load ES and one of the GPRs from memory Arithmetic, logical Arithmetic and logical operations using the data registers and memory add, sub Add source to destination; subtract source from destination; register-memory format cmp Compare source and destination; register-memory format shl, shr, rcr Shift left; shift logical right; rotate right with carry condition code as ﬁ ll cbw Convert byte in eight rightmost bits of EAX to 16-bit word in right of EAX test Logical AND of source and destination sets condition codes inc, dec Increment destination, decrement destination or, xor Logical OR; exclusive OR; register-memory format String Move between string operands; length given by a repeat preﬁx movs Copies from string source to destination by incrementing ESI and EDI; may be repeated lods Loads a byte, word, or doubleword of a string into the EAX register FIGURE 2.38  Some typical operations on the x86. Many operations use register-memory format, where either the source or the destination may be memory and the other may be a register or immediate operand.

 2.19  Real Stuff: x86 Instructions x86 Instruction Encoding Saving the worst for last, the encoding of instructions in the 80386 is complex, with many different instruction formats. Instructions for the 80386 may vary from 1 byte, when there is only one operand, up to 15 bytes. Figure 2.39 shows the instruction format for several of the example instructions in Figure 2.37. The opcode byte usually contains a bit saying whether the operand is 8 bits or 32 bits. For some instructions, the opcode may include the addressing mode and FIGURE 2.39  Typical x86 instruction formats. Figure 2.39 shows the encoding of the postbyte. Many instructions contain the 1-bit field w, which says whether the operation is a byte or a doubleword. The d field in MOV is used in instructions that may move to or from memory and shows the direction of the move. The ADD instruction requires 32 bits for the immediate field, because in 32-bit mode, the immediates are either 8 bits or 32 bits. The immediate field in the TEST is 32 bits long because there is no 8-bit mode immediate for test in 32-bit mode. Overall, instructions may vary from 1 to 15 bytes in length. The long length comes from extra 1-byte prefixes, having both a 4-byte immediate and a 4-byte displacement address, using an opcode of 2 bytes, and using the scaled index mode specifier, which adds another byte. a. JE EIP + displacement b. CALL c. MOV EBX, [EDI + 45] d. PUSH ESI e. ADD EAX, #6765 f. TEST EDX, #42 Immediate Postbyte TEST ADD PUSH MOV CALL JE w w Immediate Reg Reg w d Displacement r/m Postbyte Offset Displacement Condi- tion 1 1

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer the register; this is true in many instructions that have the form “register = register op immediate.” Other instructions use a “postbyte” or extra opcode byte, labeled “mod, reg, r/m,” which contains the addressing mode information. This postbyte is used for many of the instructions that address memory. The base plus scaled index mode uses a second postbyte, labeled “sc, index, base.” Figure 2.40 shows the encoding of the two postbyte address specifiers for both 16-bit and 32-bit modes. Unfortunately, to understand fully which registers and which addressing modes are available, you need to see the encoding of all addressing modes and sometimes even the encoding of the instructions. x86 Conclusion Intel had a 16-bit microprocessor two years before its competitors’ more elegant architectures, such as the Motorola 68000, and this head start led to the selection of the 8086 as the CPU for the IBM PC. Intel engineers generally acknowledge that the x86 is more difficult to build than computers like RISC-V and MIPS, but the large market meant in the PC era that AMD and Intel could afford more resources to help overcome the added complexity. What the x86 lacks in style, it rectifies with market size, making it beautiful from the right perspective. Its saving grace is that the most frequently used x86 architectural components are not too difficult to implement, as AMD and Intel have demonstrated by rapidly improving performance of integer programs since 1978. To get that performance, compilers must avoid the portions of the architecture that are hard to implement fast. In the post-PC era, however, despite considerable architectural and manufacturing expertise, x86 has not yet been competitive in the personal mobile device. FIGURE 2.40  The encoding of the first address specifier of the x86: mod, reg, r/m. The first four columns show the encoding of the 3-bit reg field, which depends on the w bit from the opcode and whether the machine is in 16-bit mode (8086) or 32-bit mode (80386). The remaining columns explain the mod and r/m fields. The meaning of the 3-bit r/m field depends on the value in the 2-bit mod field and the address size. Basically, the registers used in the address calculation are listed in the sixth and seventh columns, under mod = 0, with mod = 1 adding an 8-bit displacement and mod = 2 adding a 16-bit or 32-bit displacement, depending on the address mode. The exceptions are 1) r/m = 6 when mod = 1 or mod = 2 in 16-bit mode selects BP plus the displacement; 2) r/m = 5 when mod = 1 or mod = 2 in 32-bit mode selects EBP plus displacement; and 3) r/m = 4 in 32-bit mode when mod does not equal 3, where (sib) means use the scaled index mode shown in Figure 2.39. When mod = 3, the r/m field indicates a register, using the same encoding as the reg field combined with the w bit.

 2.20  Real Stuff: The Rest of the RISC-V Instruction Set 2.20 Real Stuff: The Rest of the RISC-V Instruction Set With the goal of making an instruction set architecture suitable for a wide variety of computers, the RISC-V architects partitioned the instruction set into a base architecture and several extensions. Each is named with a letter of the alphabet, and the base architecture is named I for integer. The base architecture has few instructions relative to other popular instruction sets today; indeed, this chapter has already covered nearly all of them. This section rounds out the base architecture, then describes the five standard extensions. Figure 2.41 lists the remaining instructions in the base RISC-V architecture. The first instruction, auipc, is used for PC-relative memory addressing. Like the lui instruction, it holds a 20-bit constant that corresponds to bits 12 through 31 of an integer. auipc’s effect is to add this number to the PC and write the sum to a register. Combined with an instruction like addi, it is possible to address any byte of memory within 4 GiB of the PC. This feature is useful for position-independent code, which can execute correctly no matter where in memory it is loaded. It is most frequently used in dynamically linked libraries. The next four instructions compare two integers, then write the Boolean result of the comparison to a register. slt and sltu compare two registers as signed and unsigned numbers, respectively, then write 1 to a register if the first value is less than the second value, or 0 otherwise. slti and sltiu perform the same comparisons, but with an immediate for the second operand. That’s it for the base architecture! Figure 2.42 lists the five standard extensions. The first, M, adds instructions to multiply and divide integers. Chapter  3 will introduce several instructions in the M extension. The second extension, A, supports atomic memory operations for multiprocessor synchronization. The load-reserved (lr.w) and store-conditional (sc.w) instructions introduced in Section 2.11 are members of the A extension. The remaining 18 instructions are optimizations of common synchronization FIGURE 2.41  The remaining five instructions in the base RISC-V instruction set architecture.

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer patterns, like atomic exchange and atomic addition, but do not add any additional functionality over load-reserved and store-conditional. The third and fourth extensions, F and D, provide operations on floating-point numbers, which are described in Chapter 3. The last extension, C, provides no new functionality at all. Rather, it takes the most popular RISC-V instructions, like addi, and provides equivalent instructions that are only 16 bits in length, rather than 32. It thereby allows programs to be expressed in fewer bytes, which can reduce cost and, as we will see in Chapter 5, can improve performance. To fit in 16 bits, the new instructions have restrictions on their operands: for example, some instructions can only access some of the 32 registers, and the immediate fields are narrower. Taken together, the RISC-V base and extensions have 184 instructions, plus 13 system instructions that will be introduced at the end of Chapter 5. 2.21 Going Faster: Matrix Multiply in C We start by rewriting the Python program from Section 1.10. Figure 2.43 shows a version of a matrix–matrix multiply written in C. This program is commonly called DGEMM, which stands for Double-precision GEneral Matrix Multiply. Because we are passing the matrix dimension as the parameter , this version of DGEMM uses single-dimensional versions of matrices , , and and address arithmetic to get better performance instead of using the more intuitive two-dimensional arrays that we saw in Python. The comments in the figure remind us of this more intuitive notation. Figure 2.44 shows the x86 assembly language output for the inner loop of Figure 2.43. The five floating-point instructions start with a and include in the name, which stands for scalar double precision. FIGURE 2.42  The RISC-V instruction set architecture is divided into the base ISA, named I, and five standard extensions, M, A, F, D, and C. RISC-V International is developing many other optional instruction extensions. Unlike most architectures, the RISC-V software stack only assumes the base architecture (I), with other extensions optional that are only issued by the compiler if the processor includes those options.

 2.21  Going Faster: Matrix Multiply in C FIGURE 2.43  C version of a double-precision matrix multiply, widely known as DGEMM for Double- precision GEneral Matrix Multiply (GEMM). 1. void dgemm (int n, double* A, double* B, double* C) 2. { 3. for (int i = 0; i < n; ++i) 4. for (int j = 0; j < n; ++j) 5. { 6. double cij = C[i+j*n]; /* cij = C[i][j] */ 7. for( int k = 0; k < n; k++ ) 8. cij += A[i+k*n] * B[k+j*n]; /* cij += A[i][k]*B[k][j] */ 9. C[i+j*n] = cij; /* C[i][j] = cij */ 10. } 11. } FIGURE 2.44  The x86 assembly language for the body of the nested loops generated by compiling the unoptimized C code in Figure 2.43 using gcc with -O3 optimization flags. 1. vmovsd (%r10),%xmm0 # Load 1 element of C into %xmm0 2. mov %rsi,%rcx # register %rcx = %rsi 3. xor %eax,%eax # register %eax = 0 4. vmovsd (%rcx),%xmm1 # Load 1 element of B into %xmm1 5. add %r9,%rcx # register %rcx = %rcx + %r9 6. vmulsd (%r8,%rax,8),%xmm1,%xmm1 # Multiply %xmm1, element of A 7. add $0x1,%rax # register %rax = %rax + 1 8. cmp %eax,%edi # compare %eax to %edi 9. vaddsd %xmm1,%xmm0,%xmm0 # Add %xmm1, %xmm0 10. jg 30 <dgemm+0x30> # jump if %eax > %edi 11. add $0x1,%r11 # register %r11 = %r11 + 1 12. vmovsd %xmm0,(%r10) # Store %xmm0 into C element

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer Figur 2.45 shows the performance of the C program as we vary the optimization parameter compared with the Python program. Even the unoptimized C program is dramatically faster. As we increase optimization levels it gets even faster; the cost is longer compile time. The reasons for the speedup are fundamentally using a compiler instead of an interpreter and because the type declarations of C allow the compiler to produce much more efficient code. 2.22 Fallacies and Pitfalls Fallacy:  More powerful instructions mean higher performance. Part of the power of the Intel x86 is the prefixes that can modify the execution of the following instruction. One prefix can repeat the subsequent instruction until a counter steps down to 0. Thus, to move data in memory, it would seem that the natural instruction sequence is to use move with the repeat prefix to perform 32-bit memory-to-memory moves. An alternative method, which uses the standard instructions found in all computers, is to load the data into the registers and then store the registers back to memory. This second version of this program, with the code replicated to reduce loop overhead, copies at about 1.5 times as fast. A third version, which uses the larger floating-point registers instead of the integer registers of the x86, copies at about 2.0 times as fast as the complex move instruction. Fallacy:  Write in assembly language to obtain the highest performance. At one time compilers for programming languages produced naïve instruction sequences; the increasing sophistication of compilers means the gap between compiled code and code produced by hand is closing fast. In fact, to compete with current compilers, the assembly language programmer needs to understand the concepts in Chapters 4 and 5 thoroughly (processor pipelining and memory hierarchy). This battle between compilers and assembly language coders is another situation in which humans are losing ground. For example, C offers the programmer a chance to give a hint to the compiler about which variables to keep in registers versus spilled to memory. When compilers were poor at register allocation, such hints were vital to performance. In fact, some old C textbooks spent a fair amount of time giving examples that effectively use register hints. Today’s C compilers generally ignore these hints, because the compiler does a better job at allocation than the programmer does. FIGURE 2.45  Speed of DGEMM in Figure 2.43 over the Python program in Section 1.10 as we increase optimization levels. -O0 (fastest compile time) -O1 -O2 -O3 (fastest run time)

 2.22  Fallacies and Pitfalls Even if writing by hand resulted in faster code, the dangers of writing in assembly language are the protracted time spent coding and debugging, the loss in portability, and the difficulty of maintaining such code. One of the few widely accepted axioms of software engineering is that coding takes longer if you write more lines, and it clearly takes many more lines to write a program in assembly language than in C or Java. Moreover, once it is coded, the next danger is that it will become a popular program. Such programs always live longer than expected, meaning that someone will have to update the code over several years and make it work with new releases of operating systems and recent computers. Writing in higher-level language instead of assembly language not only allows future compilers to tailor the code to forthcoming machines; it also makes the software easier to maintain and allows the program to run on more instruction set architectures. Fallacy:  The importance of commercial binary compatibility means successful instruction sets don’t change. While backwards binary compatibility is sacrosanct, Figure 2.39 shows that the x86 architecture has grown dramatically. The average is more than one instruction per month over its 40-year lifetime! Pitfall:  Forgetting that sequential word addresses in machines with byte addressing do not differ by one. FIGURE 2.46  Growth of x86 instruction set over time. While there is clear technical value to some of these extensions, this rapid change also increases the difficulty for other companies to try to build compatible processors. Year Number of Instructions

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer Many an assembly language programmer has toiled over errors made by assuming that the address of the next word can be found by incrementing the address in a register by one instead of by the word size in bytes. Forewarned is forearmed! Pitfall:  Using a pointer to an automatic variable outside its defining procedure. A common mistake in dealing with pointers is to pass a result from a procedure that includes a pointer to an array that is local to that procedure. Following the stack discipline in Figure 2.12, the memory that contains the local array will be reused as soon as the procedure returns. Pointers to automatic variables can lead to chaos. 2.23 Concluding Remarks The two principles of the stored-program computer are the use of instructions that are indistinguishable from numbers and the use of alterable memory for programs. These principles allow a single machine to aid cancer researchers, financial advisers, and novelists in their specialties. The selection of a set of instructions that the machine can understand demands a delicate balance among the number of instructions needed to execute a program, the number of clock cycles needed by an instruction, and the speed of the clock. As illustrated in this chapter, three design principles guide the authors of instruction sets in making that tricky tradeoff: 1. Simplicity favors regularity. Regularity motivates many features of the RISC-V instruction set: keeping all instructions a single size, always requiring register operands in arithmetic instructions, and keeping the register fields in the same place in all instruction formats. 2. Smaller is faster. The desire for speed is the reason that RISC-V has 32 registers rather than many more. 3. Good design demands good compromises. One RISC-V example is the compromise between providing for larger addresses and constants in instructions and keeping all instructions the same length. Another big idea in this chapter is that number have no inherent type. A given bit pattern can represent an integer number or a string or a color or even an instruction. It is the program that determines the type of data. We also saw the great idea from Chapter 1 of making the common case fast applied to instruction sets as well as computer architecture. Examples of making the common RISC-V case fast include PC-relative addressing for conditional branches and immediate addressing for larger constant operands. Figure 2.47 lists the RISC-V instructions we have covered so far. Less is more. Robert Browning, Andrea del Sarto, 1855

 2.23  Concluding Remarks Above this machine level is assembly language, a language that humans can read. The assembler translates it into the binary numbers that machines can understand, and it even “extends” the instruction set by creating symbolic instructions that aren’t in the hardware. For instance, constants or addresses that are too big are broken into properly sized pieces, common variations of instructions are given their own name, and so on. Hiding details from the higher level is another example of the great idea of abstraction. FIGURE 2.47  The RISC-V instruction set covered so far. Figure 2.1 shows more details of the RISC-V architecture revealed in this chapter. The information given here is also found in Columns 1 and 2 of the RISC-V Reference Data Card at the front of the book.

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer Each category of RISC-V instructions is associated with constructs that appear in programming languages: n Arithmetic instructions correspond to the operations found in assignment statements. n Transfer instructions are most likely to occur when dealing with data structures like arrays or structures. n Conditional branches are used in if statements and in loops. n Unconditional branches are used in procedure calls and returns and for case/ switch statements. These instructions are not born equal; the popularity of the few dominates the many. For example, Figure 2.48 shows the popularity of each class of instructions for SPEC CPU2006. The varying popularity of instructions plays an important role in the chapters about datapath, control, and pipelining. After we explain computer arithmetic in Chapter  3, we reveal more of the RISC-V instruction set architecture. Historical Perspective and Further Reading This section surveys the history of instruction set architectures (ISAs) over time, and we give a short history of programming languages and compilers. ISAs include accumulator architectures, general-purpose register architectures, stack architectures, and a brief history of the x86 and ARM’s 32-bit architecture, 2.24 FIGURE 2.48  RISC-V instruction classes, examples, correspondence to high-level program language constructs, and percentage of RISC-V instructions executed by category for the average integer and floating point SPEC CPU2006 benchmarks. Figure 3.24 in Chapter 3 shows average percentage of the individual RISC-V instructions executed.

 2.24  Historical Perspective and Further Reading 174.e1 Historical Perspective and Further Reading This section surveys the history of instruction set architectures over time, and we give a short history of programming languages and compilers. ISAs include accumulator architectures, general-purpose register architectures, stack architectures, and a brief history of ARMv7 and the x86. We also review the controversial subjects of high-level-language computer architectures and reduced instruction set computer architectures. The history of programming languages includes Fortran, Lisp, Algol, C, Cobol, Pascal, Simula, Smalltalk, C++, and Java, and the history of compilers includes the key milestones and the pioneers who achieved them. Accumulator Architectures Hardware was precious in the earliest stored-program computers. Consequently, computer pioneers could not afford the number of registers found in today’s architectures. In fact, these architectures had a single register for arithmetic instructions. Since all operations would accumulate in one register, it was called the accumulator, and this style of instruction set is given the same name. For example, EDSAC in 1949 had a single accumulator. The three-operand format of RISC-V suggests that a single register is at least two registers shy of our needs. Having the accumulator as both a source operand and the destination of the operation fills part of the shortfall, but it still leaves us one operand short. That final operand is found in memory. Accumulator architectures have the memory-based operand-addressing mode suggested earlier. It follows that the add instruction of an accumulator instruction set would look like this: ADD      200 This instruction means add the accumulator to the word in memory at address 200 and place the sum back into the accumulator. No registers are specified because the accumulator is known to be both a source and a destination of the operation. The next step in the evolution of instruction sets was the addition of registers dedicated to specific operations. Hence, registers might be included to act as indices for array references in data transfer instructions, to act as separate accumulators for multiply or divide instructions, and to serve as the top-of-stack pointer. Perhaps the best-known example of this style of instruction set is found in the Intel 80x86. This style of instruction set is labeled extended accumulator, dedicated register, or special-purpose register. Like the single-register accumulator architectures, one operand may be in memory for arithmetic instructions. Like the RISC-V architecture, however, there are also instructions where all the operands are registers. accumulator  Archaic term for register. On-line use of it as a synonym for “register” is a fairly reliable indication that the user has been around quite a while. Eric Raymond, The New Hacker’s Dictionary, 1991 2.24

174.e2 2.24  Historical Perspective and Further Reading General-Purpose Register Architectures The generalization of the dedicated-register architecture allows all the registers to be used for any purpose, hence the name general-purpose register. RISC-V is an example of a general-purpose register architecture. This style of instruction set may be further divided into those that allow one operand to be in memory (as found in accumulator architectures), called a register-memory architecture, and those that demand that operands always be in registers, called either a load-store or a register-register architecture. Figure e2.24.1 shows a history of the number of registers in some popular computers. The first load-store architecture was the CDC 6600 in 1963, considered by many to be the first supercomputer. RISC-V, ARMv7, ARMv8, and MIPS are more recent examples of a load-store architecture. load-store architecture  Also called register- register architecture. An instruction set architecture in which all operations are between registers and data memory may only be accessed via loads or stores. Machine Architectural style Year EDSAC Accumulator IBM 701 Accumulator CDC 6600 Load-store Register-memory M B I DEC PDP-8 Accumulator DEC PDP-11 Register-memory Intel 8008 Accumulator Motorola 6800 Accumulator Register-memory, memory-memory DEC VAX Intel 8086 Extended accumulator Register-memory Motorola 68000 Intel 80386 Register-memory Load-store M R A Load-store S P I M Load-store C S I R -A P P H Load-store C R A P S Load-store PowerPC Load-store DEC Alpha Load-store HP/Intel IA-64 Register-memory Regular-memory AMD64 (EMT64) RISC-V Load-store RISC-V Number of general-purpose registers FIGURE e2.24.1  The number of general-purpose registers in popular architectures over the years. The 80386 was Intel’s attempt to transform the 8086 into a general-purpose register-memory instruction set. Perhaps the best-known register-memory instruction set is the IBM 360 architecture, first announced in 1964. This 

 2.24  Historical Perspective and Further Reading 174.e3 instruction set is still at the core of IBM’s mainframe computers—still responsible for $10 billion per year in annual sales. Register-memory architectures were the most popular in the 1960s and the first half of the 1970s. Digital Equipment Corporation’s VAX architecture took memory operands one step further in 1977. It allowed an instruction to use any combination of registers and memory operands. A style of architecture in which all operands can be in memory is called memory-memory. (In truth the VAX instruction set, like almost all other instruction sets since the IBM 360, is a hybrid, since it also has general- purpose registers.) The Intel x86 has many versions of a 64-bit add to specify whether an operand is in memory or is in a register. In addition, the memory operand can be accessed with more than seven addressing modes. This combination of address modes and register-memory operands means that there are dozens of variants of an x86 add instruction. Clearly, this variability makes x86 implementations more challenging. Compact Code and Stack Architectures When memory is scarce, it is also important to keep programs small, so architectures like the Intel x86, IBM 360, and VAX had variable-length instructions, both to match the varying operand specifications and to minimize code size. Intel x86 instructions are from 1 to 15 bytes long; IBM 360 instructions are 2, 4, or 6 bytes long; and VAX instruction lengths are anywhere from 1 to 54 bytes. One place where code size is still important is embedded applications. In recognition of this need, ARM, MIPS, and RISC-V all made versions of their instructions sets that offer both 16-bit instruction formats and 32-bit instruction formats: Thumb and Thumb-2 for ARM, MIPS-16, and RISC-V Compressed. Despite being limited to just two sizes, Thumb, Thumb-2, MIPS- 16, and RISC-V Compressed programs are about 25% to 30% smaller, which makes their code sizes smaller than those of the 80x86. Smaller code sizes have the added benefit of improving instruction cache hit rates (see Chapter 5). In the 1960s, a few companies followed a radical approach to instruction sets. In the belief that it was too hard for compilers to utilize registers effectively, these companies abandoned registers altogether! Instruction sets were based on a stack model of execution, like that found in the older Hewlett-Packard handheld calculators. Operands are pushed on the stack from memory or popped off the stack into memory. Operations take their operands from the stack and then place the result back onto the stack. In addition to simplifying compilers by eliminating register allocation, stack architectures lent themselves to compact instruction encoding, thereby removing memory size as an excuse not to program in high- level languages. Memory space was perceived to be precious again for Java, both because memory space is limited to keep costs low in embedded applications and because programs may be downloaded over the Internet or phone lines as Java applets, and smaller programs take less time to transmit. Hence, compact instruction encoding was desirable for Java bytecodes.

174.e4 2.24  Historical Perspective and Further Reading High-Level-Language Computer Architectures In the 1960s, systems software was rarely written in high-level languages. For example, virtually every commercial operating system before UNIX was programmed in assembly language, and more recently even OS/2 was originally programmed at that same low level. Some people blamed the code density of the instruction sets, rather than the programming languages and the compiler technology. Hence, an architecture design philosophy called high-level-language computer architecture was advocated, with the goal of making the hardware more like the programming languages. More efficient programming languages and compilers, plus expanding memory, doomed this movement to a historical footnote. The Burroughs B5000 was the commercial fountainhead of this philosophy, but today there is no significant commercial descendant of this 1960s radical. Reduced Instruction Set Computer Architectures This language-oriented design philosophy was replaced in the 1980s by RISC (reduced instruction set computer). Improvements in programming languages, compiler technology, and memory cost meant that less programming was being done at the assembly level, so instruction sets could be measured by how well compilers used them, in contrast to how skillfully assembly language programmers used them. Virtually all new instruction sets since 1982 have followed this RISC philosophy of fixed instruction lengths, load-store instruction sets, limited addressing modes, and limited operations. ARMv7, ARMv8, ARC, Hitachi SH, IBM PowerPC, MIPS, and, of course, RISC-V, are all examples of RISC architectures. A Brief History of the ARMv7 ARM started as the processor for the Acorn computer, hence its original name of Acorn RISC Machine. The Berkeley RISC papers influenced its architecture. One of the most important early applications was emulation of the AM 6502, a 16-bit microprocessor. This emulation was to provide most of the software for the Acorn computer. As the 6502 had a variable-length instruction set that was a multiple of bytes, 6502 emulation helps explain the emphasis on shifting and masking in the ARMv7 instruction set. Its popularity as a low-power embedded computer began with its selection as the processor for the ill-fated Apple Newton personal digital assistant. Although the Newton was not as popular as Apple hoped, Apple’s blessing gave visibility to the earlier ARM instruction sets, and they subsequently caught on in several markets, including cell phones. Unlike the Newton experience, the extraordinary success of cell phones explains why 100 billion ARM processors were shipped between 1999 and 2016. One of the major events in ARM’s history is the 64-bit address extension called version 8. ARM took the opportunity to redesign the instruction set to make it look much more like MIPS than like earlier ARM versions.

 2.24  Historical Perspective and Further Reading 174.e5 A Brief History of the x86 The ancestors of the x86 were the first microprocessors, produced starting in 1972. The Intel 4004 and 8008 were extremely simple 4-bit and 8-bit accumulator-style architectures. Morse et  al. [1980] describe the evolution of the 8086 from the 8080 in the late 1970s as an attempt to provide a 16-bit architecture with better throughput. At that time, almost all programming for microprocessors was done in assembly language—both memory and compilers were in short supply. Intel wanted to keep its base of 8080 users, so the 8086 was designed to be “compatible” with the 8080. The 8086 was never object-code compatible with the 8080, but the architectures were close enough that translation of assembly language programs could be done automatically. In early 1980, IBM selected a version of the 8086 with an 8-bit external bus, called the 8088, for use in the IBM PC. They chose the 8-bit version to reduce the cost of the architecture. This choice, together with the tremendous success of the IBM PC, has made the 8086 architecture ubiquitous in the PC era. The success of the IBM PC was due in part because IBM opened the architecture of the PC and enabled the PC-clone industry to flourish. As discussed in Section 2.18, the 80286, 80386, 80486, Pentium, Pentium Pro, Pentium II, Pentium III, Pentium 4, and AMD64 have extended the architecture and provided a series of performance enhancements. Although the 68000 was chosen for the Macintosh, the Mac was never as pervasive as the PC, partly because Apple did not allow Mac clones based on the 68000, and the 68000 did not acquire the same software following that which the 8086 enjoys. The Motorola 68000 may have been more significant technically than the 8086, but the impact of IBM’s selection and open architecture strategy dominated the technical advantages of the 68000 in the market. Some argue that the inelegance of the x86 instruction set is unavoidable, the price that must be paid for rampant success by any architecture. We reject that notion. Obviously, no successful architecture can jettison features that were added in previous implementations, and over time, some features may be seen as undesirable. The awkwardness of the x86 begins at its core with the 8086 instruction set and was exacerbated by the architecturally inconsistent expansions found in the 8087, 80286, 80386, MMX, SSE, SSE2, SSE3, SSE4, AMD64 (EM64T), and AVX. A counterexample is the IBM 360/370 architecture, which is much older than the x86. It dominated the mainframe market just as the x86 dominated the PC market. Due undoubtedly to a better base and more compatible enhancements, this instruction set makes much more sense than the x86 55 years after its first implementation. Extending the x86 to 64-bit addressing means the architecture may last for several more decades. Instruction set anthropologists of the future will peel off layer after layer from such architectures until they uncover artifacts from the first microprocessor. Given such a find, how will they judge today’s computer architecture?

174.e6 2.24  Historical Perspective and Further Reading A Brief History of Programming Languages In 1954, John Backus led a team at IBM to create a more natural notation for scientific programming. The goal of Fortran, for “FORmula TRANslator,” was to reduce the time to develop programs. Fortran included many ideas found in programming languages today, including assignment statements, expressions, typed variables, loops, and arrays. The development of the language and the compiler went hand in hand. This language became a standard that has evolved over time to improve programmer productivity and program portability. The evolutionary steps are Fortran I, II, IV, 77, 90, 95, 2003, 2008, and 2018. Fortran was developed for IBM’s second commercial computer, the 704, which was also the cradle of another important programming language: Lisp. John McCarthy invented the “LISt Processing” language in 1958. Its mantra is that programming can be considered as manipulating lists, so the language contains operations to follow links and to compose new lists from old ones. This list notation is used for the code as well as the data, so modifying or composing Lisp programs is common. The big contribution was dynamic data structures and, hence, pointers. Given that its inventor was a pioneer in artificial intelligence, Lisp became popular in the AI community. Lisp has no type declarations, and Lisp traditionally reclaims storage automatically via built-in garbage collection. Lisp was originally interpreted, although compilers were later developed for it. Fortran inspired the international community to invent a programming language that was more natural to express algorithms than Fortran, with less emphasis on coding. This language became Algol, for “ALGOrithmic Language.” Like Fortran, it included type declarations, but it added recursive procedure calls, nested if-then-else statements, while loops, begin-end statements to structure code, and call-by-name. Algol-60 became the classic language for academics to teach programming in the 1960s. Although engineers, AI researchers, and computer scientists had their own programming languages, the same could not be said for business data processing. Cobol, for “COmmon Business-Oriented Language,” was developed as a standard for this purpose contemporary with Algol-60. Cobol was created to be easy to read, so it follows English vocabulary and punctuation. It added records to programming languages, and separated description of data from description of code. Niklaus Wirth was a member of the Algol-68 committee, which was supposed to update Algol-60. He was bothered by the complexity of the result, and so he wrote a minority report to show that a programming language could combine the algorithmic power of Algol-60 with the record structure from Cobol and be simple to understand, easy to implement, yet still powerful. This minority report became Pascal. It was first implemented with an interpreter and a set of Pascal bytecodes. The ease of implementation led to its being widely deployed, much more than Algol-68, and it soon replaced Algol-60 as the most popular language for academics to teach programming. In the same period, Dennis Ritchie invented the C programming language to use in building UNIX. Its inventors say it is not a “very high level” programming language or a big one, and it is not aimed at a particular application. Given its birthplace, it was 

 2.24  Historical Perspective and Further Reading 174.e7 very good at systems programming, and the UNIX operating system and C compiler were written in C. UNIX’s popularity helped spur C’s popularity. The concept of object orientation is first captured in Simula-67, a simulation language successor to Algol-60. Invented by Ole-Johan Dahl and Kristen Nygaard at the University of Oslo in 1967, it introduced objects, classes, and inheritance. Object orientation proved to be a powerful idea. It led Alan Kay and others at Xerox Palo Alto Research Center to invent Smalltalk in the 1970s. Smalltalk-80 married the typeless variables and garbage collection from Lisp and the object orientation of Simula-67. It relied on interpretation that was defined by a Smalltalk virtual machine with a Smalltalk bytecode instruction set. Kay and his colleagues argued that processors were getting faster, and that we must eventually be willing to sacrifice some performance to improve program development. Another example was CLU, which demonstrated that an object-oriented language could be defined that allowed compile-time type checking. Simula-67 also inspired Bjarne Stroustrup of Bell Labs to develop an object-oriented version of C called C++ in the 1980s. C++ became widely used in industry. Dissatisfied with C++, a group at Sun led by James Gosling invented Oak in the early 1990s. It was invented as an object-oriented C dialect for embedded devices as part of a major Sun project. To make it portable, it was interpreted and had its own virtual machine and bytecode instruction set. Since it was a new language, it had a more elegant object-oriented design than C++ and was much easier to learn and compile than Smalltalk-80. Since Sun’s embedded project failed, we might never have heard of it had someone not made the connection between Oak and programmable browsers for the World Wide Web. It was rechristened Java, and in 1995, Netscape announced that it would be shipping with its browser. It soon became extraordinarily popular. Java had the rare distinction of becoming the standard language for new business-data-processing applications and the favored language for academics to teach programming. Java and languages like it encourage reuse of code, and hence programmers make heavy use of libraries, whereas in the past they were more likely to write everything from scratch. Several people in this history section won ACM A. M. Turing Awards, at least in part for their contributions to programming languages: John Backus (1977), John McCarthy (1971), Niklaus Wirth (1984), Dennis Ritchie (1983), Ole-Johan Dahl and Kristen Nygaard (2001), and Alan Key (2003). A Brief History of Compilers Backus and his group were very concerned that Fortran would be unsuccessful if skeptics found examples where the Fortran version ran at half the speed of the equivalent assembly language program. Their success with one of the first compilers created a beachhead that many others followed. Early compilers were ad hoc programs that performed the steps described in Section 2.15 online. These ad hoc approaches were replaced with a solid theoretical foundation for each of these steps. Each time the theory was established, a tool was built based on that theory that automated the creation of that step.

174.e8 2.24  Historical Perspective and Further Reading The theoretical roots underlying scanning and parsing derive from automata theory, and the relationship between languages and automata was known early. The scanning task corresponds to recognition of a language accepted by a finite- state automata, and parsing corresponds to recognition of a language by a push- down automata (basically an automata with a stack). Languages are described by grammars, which are a set of rules that tell how any legal program can be generated. The scanning pass of a compiler was well understood early, but parsing is harder. The earliest parsers use precedence techniques, which derived from the structure of arithmetic statements, and were then generalized. The great breakthrough in modern parsing was made by Donald Knuth in the invention of LR-parsing, which codified the two key steps in the parsing technique, pushing a token on the stack or reducing a set of tokens on the stack using a grammar rule. The strong theory formulation for scanning and parsing led to the development of automated tools for compiler constructions, such as lex and yacc, the tools developed as part of UNIX. Optimizations occurred in many compilers, and it is harder to determine the first examples in most cases. However, Victor Vyssotsky did the first papers on data flow analysis in 1963, and William McKeeman is generally credited with the first peephole optimizer in 1965. The group at IBM, including John Cocke and Fran Allan, developed many of the early optimization concepts, as well as defining and extending the concepts of flow analysis. Important contributions were also made by Al Aho and Jeff Ullman. One of the biggest challenges for optimization was register allocation. It was so difficult that some architects used stack architectures just to avoid the problem. The breakthrough came when researchers working on compilers for the 801, an early RISC architecture, recognized that coloring a graph with a minimum number of colors was equivalent to allocating a fixed number of registers to the unlimited number of virtual registers used in intermediate forms. Compilers also played an important role in the open-source movement. Richard Stallman’s self-appointed mission was to make a public domain version of UNIX. He built the GNU C Compiler (gcc) as an open-source compiler in 1987. It soon was ported to many architectures, and is used in many systems today. Further Reading Bayko, J. [1996]. “Great microprocessors of the past and present,” search for it on the http://www.cpushack. com/CPU/cpu.html. A personal view of the history of both representative and unusual microprocessors, from the Intel 4004 to the Patriot Scientific ShBoom! Kane, G. and J. Heinrich [1992]. MIPS RISC Architecture, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ. This book describes the MIPS architecture in greater detail than Appendix A. Levy, H. and R. Eckhouse [1989]. Computer Programming and Architecture, The VAX, Digital Press, Boston. This book concentrates on the VAX, but also includes descriptions of the Intel 8086, IBM 360, and CDC 6600.

 2.24  Historical Perspective and Further Reading 174.e9 Morse, S., B. Ravenal, S. Mazor, and W. Pohlman [1980]. “Intel microprocessors—8080 to 8086”, Computer 13 10 (October). The architecture history of the Intel from the 4004 to the 8086, according to the people who participated in the designs. Wakerly, J. [1989]. Microcomputer Architecture and Programming, Wiley, New York. The Motorola 6800 is the main focus of the book, but it covers the Intel 8086, Motorola 6809, TI 9900, and Zilog Z8000.

 2.25  Self-Study ARMv7. We also review the controversial subjects of high-level-language computer architectures and reduced instruction set computer architectures. The history of programming languages includes Fortran, Lisp, Algol, C, Cobol, Pascal, Simula, Smalltalk, C++, and Java, and the history of compilers includes the key milestones and the pioneers who achieved them. The rest of Section 2.24 is found online. 2.25 Self-Study Instructions as Numbers. Given this binary number: 00000001010010110010100000100011two What is it in hexadecimal format? Assuming it is an unsigned number, what is it in decimal? Does the value change if it is considered a signed number? What assembly language program does it represent? Instructions as numbers and Insecurity. Although programs are just numbers in memory, Chapter 5 shows how to tell the computer how to protect the program from being modified by labelling a portion of the address space as read-only. Clever attackers exploit bugs in C programs to nevertheless insert their own code during program execution despite the program being protected. Here is a simple string copy program that copies what the user types into a local variable on the stack. #include <string.h> void copyinput (char *input) { char copy[10]; strcpy(copy, input); // no bounds checking in strcpy } int main (int argc, char **argv) { copyinput(argv[1]); return 0; } What happens if the user writes much more than 10 characters as input? What could be the consequence to program execution? How could this let an attacker take over program execution?

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer While being faster. Here is the RISC-V code for the C while loop from pages 92-93: Loop: // go to Exit if save [i] k Exit: ¹ Assume the loop typically executes 10 times. Make the loop faster by executing on average one branch instruction per loop rather than both one jump and one branch instruction. The Anticompiler. Here is a portion of MIPS assembly language with comments for the first five instructions: sll ix5, x18, 2 # x5 = f * 4 add x5, x23, x5 # x5 = &A[f] sll ix6, x19, 2 # x6 = g * 4 add x6, , x24, x6 # x6 = &B[g] lw x18 0(x5) # f = A[f] addi x7, , , lw x5 0(x7) add x5 , x5, x18 # sw x5 0(x6) # # # x5 Assume that the variables f, g, h, i, and j are assigned to registers $s0, $s1, $s2, $s3, and $s4, respectively. Assume that the base address of the arrays A and B are in registers $s6 and $s7, respectively. Complete the comments for the last four instructions, and then show the C code that could have been compiled into these MIPS instructions. Self-Study Answers Instructions as Numbers Binary: 00000001010010110010100000100011two Hexadecimal: 14B2823hex Decimal: 21702691ten Since the leading bit is a 0, it is the same decimal value whether a signed or an unsigned integer. Assembly language: sw x20, 16(x22)

 2.25  Self-Study Machine language: # immediate[11:5] rs2 rs1 funct3 immediate[4:0] opcode Instructions as numbers and Insecurity The local variable copy can safely copy user input up to 9 characters followed by the null character that terminates a string. Anything longer will overwrite other values on the stack. As the stack grows down, the values below the stack include stack frames from earlier procedure calls, which include return addresses. A careful attacker can not only insert code onto the stack but can overwrite return addresses in the stack so that program could eventually use the attacker’s return address to start executing code placed on the stack after some procedures returned. While being faster. The trick is to invert the conditional branch and have it jump to the top of the loop rather than having it skip the jump at the bottom of the loop. To match the semantics of the while loop, the code must first check to see if before incrementing: slli x10, // Temp reg x10 = i * 4 add x10, x10, x25 x10 = address of save[i] lw x9, 0(x10) // p Tem reg x9 = save[i] bne x9, x24, Exit // go to Exit if save[i] ¹ k Loop: addi x22, x22, x22, // i = i + 1 slli x10, x22, 2 // Temp reg x10 = i * 4 add x10, x10, x25 // x10 = address of save[i] lw x9, 0(x10) // Temp reg x9 = save[i] beq x9, L x24, oop // go to Loop if save[i] = k Exit: // The Anticompiler: slli x5, x6, x6, x18, 2 # x5 = f * 4 add x5, x23, x5 # x5 = &A[f] slli x19, # x6 = g * 4 add x24, x6 # x6 = &B[g] lw x18, 0(x5) # # f = A[f] addi x7, x5, x7=x5+4 =>x7 points to A[f+1] now lw x5, 0(x7) # x5 = A[f+1] add x5, x5, x18 # x5 = x5 + $s0 =>x5 is now A[f] + A[f+1] sw x5, 0(x6) # store the result into B[g]

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer The C statement equivalent is B[g] = A[f] + A[f+1]; 2.26 Exercises 2.1  [5] <§2.2> For the following C statement, write the corresponding RISC-V assembly code. Assume that the C variables f, g, and h, have already been placed in registers x5, x6, and x7 respectively. Use a minimal number of RISC-V assembly instructions. f = g + (h − 5); 2.2  [5] <§2.2> Write a single C statement that corresponds to the two RISC-V assembly instructions below. add f, g, h add f, i, f 2.3  [5] <§§2.2, 2.3> For the following C statement, write the corresponding RISC-V assembly code. Assume that the variables f, g, h, i, and j are assigned to registers x5, x6, x7, x28, and x29, respectively. Assume that the base address of the arrays A and B are in registers x10 and x11, respectively. B[8] = A[i−j]; 2.4  [10] <§§2.2, 2.3> For the RISC-V assembly instructions below, what is the corresponding C statement? Assume that the variables f, g, h, i, and j are assigned to registers x5, x6, x7, x28, and x29, respectively. Assume that the base address of the arrays A and B are in registers x10 and x11, respectively. slli x30, x5, 3  // x30 = f*8 add x30, x10, x30  // x30 = &A[f] slli x31, x6, 3  // x31 = g*8 add x31, x11, x31  // x31 = &B[g] lw x5, 0(x30)  // f = A[f] addi x12, x30, 8 lw x30, 0(x12) add x30, x30, x5 lw x30, 0(x31)

 2.26  Exercises 2.5  [5] <§2.3> Show how the value 0xabcdef12 would be arranged in memory of a little-endian and a big-endian machine. Assume the data are stored starting at address 0 and that the word size is 4 bytes. 2.6  [5] <§2.4> Translate 0xabcdef12 into decimal. 2.7  [5] <§§2.2, 2.3> Translate the following C code to RISC-V. Assume that the variables f, g, h, i, and j are assigned to registers x5, x6, x7, x28, and x29, respectively. Assume that the base address of the arrays A and B are in registers x10 and x11, respectively. Assume that the elements of the arrays A and B are 8-byte words: B[8] = A[i] + A[j]; 2.8  [10] <§§2.2, 2.3> Translate the following RISC-V code to C. Assume that the variables f, g, h, i, and j are assigned to registers x5, x6, x7, x28, and x29, respectively. Assume that the base address of the arrays A and B are in registers x10 and x11, respectively. addi  x30, x10, 8 addi   x31, x10, 0 sw x31, 0(x30) lw x30, 0(x30) add    x5, x30, x31 2.9  [20] <§§2.2, 2.5> For each RISC-V instruction in Exercise 2.8, show the value of the opcode (op), source register (rs1), and destination register (rd) fields. For the I-type instructions, show the value of the immediate field, and for the R-type instructions, show the value of the second source register (rs2). For non U- and UJ-type instructions, show the funct3 field, and for R-type and S-type instructions, also show the funct7 field. 2.10  Assume that registers x5 and x6 hold the values 0x8000000000000000 and 0xD000000000000000, respectively. 2.10.1  [5] <§2.4> What is the value of x30 for the following assembly code? add x30, x5, x6 2.10.2  [5] <§2.4> Is the result in x30 the desired result, or has there been overflow? 2.10.3  [5] <§2.4> For the contents of registers x5 and x6 as specified above, what is the value of x30 for the following assembly code? sub x30, x5, x6 2.10.4  [5] <§2.4> Is the result in x30 the desired result, or has there been overflow?

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer 2.10.5  [5] <§2.4> For the contents of registers x5 and x6 as specified above, what is the value of x30 for the following assembly code? add x30, x5, x6 add x30, x30, x5 2.10.6  [5] <§2.4> Is the result in x30 the desired result, or has there been overflow? 2.11  Assume that x5 holds the value 128ten. 2.11.1  [5] <§2.4> For the instruction add x30, x5, x6, what is the range(s) of values for x6 that would result in overflow? 2.11.2  [5] <§2.4> For the instruction sub x30, x5, x6, what is the range(s) of values for x6 that would result in overflow? 2.11.3  [5] <§2.4> For the instruction sub x30, x6, x5, what is the range(s) of values for x6 that would result in overflow? 2.12  [5] <§§2.2, 2.5> Provide the instruction type and assembly language instruction for the following binary value: 0000 0000 0001 0000 1000 0000 1011 0011two Hint: Figure 2.20 may be helpful. 2.13  [5] <§§2.2, 2.5> Provide the instruction type and hexadecimal representation of the following instruction: sw x5, 32(x30) 2.14  [5] <§2.5> Provide the instruction type, assembly language instruction, and binary representation of instruction described by the following RISC-V fields: opcode=0x33, funct3=0x0, funct7=0x20, rs2=5, rs1=7, rd=6 2.15  [5] <§2.5> Provide the instruction type, assembly language instruction, and binary representation of instruction described by the following RISC-V fields: opcode=0x3, funct3=0x3, rs1=27, rd=3, imm=0x4 2.16  Assume that we would like to expand the RISC-V register file to 128 registers and expand the instruction set to contain four times as many instructions. 2.16.1  [5] <§2.5> How would this affect the size of each of the bit fields in the R-type instructions?

 2.26  Exercises 2.16.2  [5] <§2.5> How would this affect the size of each of the bit fields in the I-type instructions? 2.16.3  [5] <§§2.5, 2.8, 2.10> How could each of the two proposed changes decrease the size of a RISC-V assembly program? On the other hand, how could the proposed change increase the size of an RISC-V assembly program? 2.17  Assume the following register contents: x5 = 0x00000000AAAAAAAA, x6 = 0x1234567812345678 2.17.1  [5] <§2.6> For the register values shown above, what is the value of x7 for the following sequence of instructions? slli x7, x5, 4 or x7, x7, x6 2.17.2  [5] <§2.6> For the register values shown above, what is the value of x7 for the following sequence of instructions? slli x7, x6, 4 2.17.3  [5] <§2.6> For the register values shown above, what is the value of x7 for the following sequence of instructions? srli x7, x5, 3 andi  x7, x7, 0xFEF 2.18  [10] <§2.6> Find the shortest sequence of RISC-V instructions that extracts bits 16 down to 11 from register x5 and uses the value of this field to replace bits 31 down to 26 in register x6 without changing the other bits of registers x5 or x6. (Be sure to test your code using x5 = 0 and x6 = 0xffffffffffffffff. Doing so may reveal a common oversight.) 2.19  [5] <§2.6> Provide a minimal set of RISC-V instructions that may be used to implement the following pseudoinstruction: not x5, x6      // bit-wise invert 2.20  [5] <§2.6> For the following C statement, write a minimal sequence of RISC-V assembly instructions that performs the identical operation. Assume x6 = A, and x17 is the base address of C. A = C[0] << 4;

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer 2.21  [5] <§2.7> Assume x5 holds the value 0x00000000001010000. What is the value of x6 after the following instructions?         bge x5, x0, ELSE         jal x0, DONE ELSE:  ori x6, x0, 2 DONE: 2.22  Suppose the program counter (PC) is set to 0x20000000. 2.22.1  [5] <§2.10> What range of addresses can be reached using the RISC-V jump-and-link (jal) instruction? (In other words, what is the set of possible values for the PC after the jump instruction executes?) 2.22.2  [5] <§2.10> What range of addresses can be reached using the RISC-V branch if equal (beq) instruction? (In other words, what is the set of possible values for the PC after the branch instruction executes?) 2.23  Consider a proposed new instruction named rpt. This instruction combines a loop’s condition check and counter decrement into a single instruction. For example rpt x29, loop would do the following: if (x29 > 0) { x29 = x29 −1; goto loop } 2.23.1  [5] <§2.7, 2.10> If this instruction were to be added to the RISC-V instruction set, what is the most appropriate instruction format? 2.23.2  [5] <§2.7> What is the shortest sequence of RISC-V instructions that performs the same operation? 2.24  Consider the following RISC-V loop: LOOP:  beq x6, x0, DONE         addi x6, x6, -1         addi x5, x5, 2         jal x0, LOOP DONE: 2.24.1  [5] <§2.7> Assume that the register x6 is initialized to the value 10. What is the final value in register x5 assuming the x5 is initially zero?

 2.26  Exercises 2.24.2  [5] <§2.7> For the loop above, write the equivalent C code. Assume that the registers x5 and x6 are integers acc and i, respectively. 2.24.3  [5] <§2.7> For the loop written in RISC-V assembly above, assume that the register x6 is initialized to the value N. How many RISC-V instructions are executed? 2.24.4  [5] <§2.7> For the loop written in RISC-V assembly above, replace the instruction “beq x6, x0, DONE” with the instruction “blt x6, x0, DONE” and write the equivalent C code. 2.25  [10] <§2.7> Translate the following C code to RISC-V assembly code. Use a minimum number of instructions. Assume that the values of a, b, i, and j are in registers x5, x6, x7, and x29, respectively. Also, assume that register x10 holds the base address of the array D. for(i=0; i<a; i++)     for(j=0; j<b; j++)         D[4*j] = i + j; 2.26  [5] <§2.7> How many RISC-V instructions does it take to implement the C code from Exercise 2.25? If the variables a and b are initialized to 10 and 1 and all elements of D are initially 0, what is the total number of RISC-V instructions executed to complete the loop? 2.27  [5] <§2.7> Translate the following loop into C. Assume that the C-level integer i is held in register x5,x6 holds the C-level integer called result, and x10 holds the base address of the integer MemArray. addi x6, x0, 0 addi x29, x0, 100 LOOP: lw x7, 0(x10) add x5, x5, x7 addi x10, x10, 8 addi x6, x6, 1 blt x6, x29, LOOP 2.28  [10] <§2.7> Rewrite the loop from Exercise 2.27 to reduce the number of RISC-V instructions executed. Hint: Notice that variable i is used only for loop control.

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer 2.29  [30] <§2.8> Implement the following C code in RISC-V assembly. Hint: Remember that the stack pointer must remain aligned on a multiple of 16. int fib(int n){ if (n==0) return 0; else if (n == 1) return 1; else return fib(n−1) + fib(n−2); } 2.30  [20] <§2.8> For each function call in Exercise 2.29, show the contents of the stack after the function call is made. Assume the stack pointer is originally at address 0x7ffffffc, and follow the register conventions as specified in Figure 2.11. 2.31  [20] <§2.8> Translate function f into RISC-V assembly language. Assume the function declaration for g is int g(int a, int b). The code for function f is as follows: int f(int a, int b, int c, int d){   return g(g(a,b), c+d); } 2.32  [5] <§2.8> Can we use the tail-call optimization in this function? If no, explain why not. If yes, what is the difference in the number of executed instructions in f with and without the optimization? 2.33  [5] <§2.8> Right before your function f from Exercise 2.31 returns, what do we know about contents of registers x10-x14, x8, x1, and sp? Keep in mind that we know what the entire function f looks like, but for function g we only know its declaration. 2.34  [30] <§2.9> Write a program in RISC-V assembly to convert an ASCII string containing a positive or negative integer decimal string to an integer. Your program should expect register x10 to hold the address of a null-terminated string containing an optional “+” or “−” followed by some combination of the digits 0 through 9. Your program should compute the integer value equivalent to this string of digits, then place the number in register x10. If a non-digit character appears anywhere in the string, your program should stop with the value −1 in register x10. For example, if register x10 points to a sequence of three 

 2.26  Exercises bytes 50ten, 52ten, 0ten (the null-terminated string “24”), then when the program stops, register x10 should contain the value 24ten. The RISC-V mul instruction takes two registers as input. There is no “muli” instruction. Thus, just store the constant 10 in a register. 2.35  Consider the following code: lb x6, 0(x7) sw x6, 8(x7) Assume that the register x7 contains the address 0×10000000 and the data at address is 0×1122334455667788. 2.35.1  [5] <§2.3, 2.9> What value is stored in 0×10000008 on a big-endian machine? 2.35.2  [5] <§2.3, 2.9> What value is stored in 0×10000008 on a little-endian machine? 2.36  [5] <§2.10> Write the RISC-V assembly code that creates the 32-bit constant 0x12345678hex and stores that value to register x10. 2.37  [10] <§2.11> Write the RISC-V assembly code to implement the following C code as an atomic “set max” operation using the lr.d/sc.d instructions. Here, the argument shvar contains the address of a shared variable which should be replaced by x if x is greater than the value it points to: void setmax(int* shvar, int x) { // Begin critical section if (x > *shvar) *shvar = x; // End critical section} } 2.38  [5] <§2.11> Using your code from Exercise 2.37 as an example, explain what happens when two processors begin to execute this critical section at the same time, assuming that each processor executes exactly one instruction per cycle. 2.39  Assume for a given processor the CPI of arithmetic instructions is 1, the CPI of load/store instructions is 10, and the CPI of branch instructions is 3. Assume a program has the following instruction breakdowns: 500 million 

Chapter 2  Instructions: Language of the Computer arithmetic instructions, 300 million load/store instructions, 100 million branch instructions. 2.39.1  [5] <§§1.6, 2.13> Suppose that new, more powerful arithmetic instructions are added to the instruction set. On average, through the use of these more powerful arithmetic instructions, we can reduce the number of arithmetic instructions needed to execute a program by 25%, while increasing the clock cycle time by only 10%. Is this a good design choice? Why? 2.39.2  [5] <§§1.6, 2.13> Suppose that we find a way to double the performance of arithmetic instructions. What is the overall speedup of our machine? What if we find a way to improve the performance of arithmetic instructions by 10 times? 2.40  Assume that for a given program 70% of the executed instructions are arithmetic, 10% are load/store, and 20% are branch. 2.40.1  [5] <§§1.6, 2.13> Given this instruction mix and the assumption that an arithmetic instruction requires two cycles, a load/store instruction takes six cycles, and a branch instruction takes three cycles, find the average CPI. 2.40.2  [5] <§§1.6, 2.13> For a 25% improvement in performance, how many cycles, on average, may an arithmetic instruction take if load/store and branch instructions are not improved at all? 2.40.3  [5] <§§1.6, 2.13> For a 50% improvement in performance, how many cycles, on average, may an arithmetic instruction take if load/store and branch instructions are not improved at all? 2.41  [10] <§2.22 > Suppose the RISC-V ISA included a scaled offset addressing mode similar to the x86 one described in Section 2.19 (Figure 2.39). Describe how you would use scaled offset loads to further reduce the number of assembly instructions needed to carry out the function given in Exercise 2.4. 2.42  [10] <§2.22> Suppose the RISC-V ISA included a scaled offset addressing mode similar to the x86 one described in Section 2.19 (Figure 2.39). Describe how you would use scaled offset loads to further reduce the number of assembly instructions needed to implement the C code given in Exercise 2.7.          Answers to Check Yourself §2.2, page 72: RISC-V, C, Java. §2.3, page 79: 2) Very slow. §2.4, page 86: First question: 2) −8ten; Second question: 4) 18,446,744,073,709,551,608ten §2.5, page 95: 3) sub x11, x10, x9; Second question: 28hex §2.6, page 98: Both. AND with a mask pattern of 1s will leaves 0s everywhere but the desired field. Shifting left by the correct amount removes the bits from the left 

 2.26  Exercises of the field. Shifting right by the appropriate amount puts the field into the right- most bits of the word, with 0s in the rest of the word. Note that AND leaves the field where it was originally, and the shift pair moves the field into the rightmost part of the word. §2.7, page 103: I. All are true. II. 1). §2.8, page 114: Both are true. §2.9, page 119: I. 1) and 2) II. 3). §2.10, page 128: I. 4) ±4 K. II. 4) ± 1 M. §2.11, page 131: Both are true. §2.12, page 140: 4) Machine independence.

Arithmetic for Computers 3.1 Introduction  190 3.2 Addition and Subtraction  190 3.3 Multiplication  193 3.4 Division  199 3.5 Floating Point  208 3.6 Parallelism and Computer Arithmetic: Subword Parallelism  233 3.7 Real Stuff: Streaming SIMD Extensions and Advanced Vector Extensions in x86  234 Numerical precision is the very soul of science. Sir D’arcy Wentworth Thompson, On Growth and Form, 1917 Computer Organization and Design RISC-V Edition. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-820331-6.00003-X © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3.8 Going Faster: Subword Parallelism and Matrix Multiply  236 3.9 Fallacies and Pitfalls  238 3.10 Concluding Remarks  241 3.11 Historical Perspective and Further Reading  242 3.12 Self-Study  242 3.13 Exercises  246 The Five Classic Components of a Computer

Chapter 3  Arithmetic for Computers 3.1 Introduction Computer words are composed of bits; thus, words can be represented as binary numbers. Chapter 2 shows that integers can be represented either in decimal or binary form, but what about the other numbers that commonly occur? For example: n What about fractions and other real numbers? n What happens if an operation creates a number bigger than can be represented? n And underlying these questions is a mystery: How does hardware really multiply or divide numbers? The goal of this chapter is to unravel these mysteries—including representation of real numbers, arithmetic algorithms, hardware that follows these algorithms— and the implications of all this for instruction sets. These insights may explain quirks that you have already encountered with computers. Moreover, we show how to use this knowledge to make arithmetic-intensive programs go much faster. 3.2 Addition and Subtraction Addition is just what you would expect in computers. Digits are added bit by bit from right to left, with carries passed to the next digit to the left, just as you would do by hand. Subtraction uses addition: the appropriate operand is simply negated before being added. Binary Addition and Subtraction Let’s try adding 6ten to 7ten in binary and then subtracting 6ten from 7ten in binary. 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000111two = 7ten + 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000110two = 6ten = 00000000 00000000 00000000 00001101two = 13ten The 4 bits to the right have all the action; Figure 3.1 shows the sums and carries. Parentheses identify the carries, with the arrows illustrating how they are passed. Subtraction: Addition’s Tricky Pal No. 10, Top Ten Courses for Athletes at a Football Factory, David Letterman et al., Book of Top Ten Lists, 1990 EXAMPLE

 3.2  Addition and Subtraction Subtracting 6ten from 7ten can be done directly: 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000111two = 7ten – 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000110two = 6ten = 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000001two = 1ten or via addition using the two’s complement representation of −6: 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000111two = 7ten + 11111111 11111111 11111111 11111010two = _6ten = 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000001two = 1ten Recall that overflow occurs when the result from an operation cannot be represented with the available hardware, in this case a 32-bit word. When can overflow occur in addition? When adding operands with different signs, overflow cannot occur. The reason is the sum must be no larger than one of the operands. For example, −10 + 4 = −6. Since the operands fit in 32 bits and the sum is no larger than an operand, the sum must fit in 32 bits as well. Therefore, no overflow can occur when adding positive and negative operands. There are similar restrictions to the occurrence of overflow during subtract, but it’s just the opposite principle: when the signs of the operands are the same, overflow cannot occur. To see this, remember that c − a = c + (−a) because we subtract by negating the second operand and then add. Therefore, when we subtract operands of the same sign we end up adding operands of different signs. From the prior paragraph, we know that overflow cannot occur in this case either. Knowing when an overflow cannot occur in addition and subtraction is all well and good, but how do we detect it when it does occur? Clearly, adding or subtracting two 32-bit numbers can yield a result that needs 33 bits to be fully expressed. ANSWER (0) (0) (0) (0) (1) (1) (1) (1) (0) (0) (Carries) (0) . . . . . . . . . FIGURE 3.1  Binary addition, showing carries from right to left. The rightmost bit adds 1 to 0, resulting in the sum of this bit being 1 and the carry out from this bit being 0. Hence, the operation for the second digit to the right is 0 + 1 + 1. This generates a 0 for this sum bit and a carry out of 1. The third digit is the sum of 1 + 1 + 1, resulting in a carry out of 1 and a sum bit of 1. The fourth bit is 1 + 0 + 0, yielding a 1 sum and no carry.

Chapter 3  Arithmetic for Computers The lack of a 33rd bit means that when an overflow occurs, the sign bit is set with the value of the result instead of the proper sign of the result. Since we need just one extra bit, only the sign bit can be wrong. Hence, overflow occurs when adding two positive numbers and the sum is negative, or vice versa. This spurious sum means a carry out occurred into the sign bit. Overflow occurs in subtraction when we subtract a negative number from a positive number and get a negative result, or when we subtract a positive number from a negative number and get a positive result. Such a ridiculous result means a borrow occurred from the sign bit. Figure 3.2 shows the combination of operations, operands, and results that indicate an overflow. We have just seen how to detect overflow for two’s complement numbers in a computer. What about overflow with unsigned integers? Unsigned integers are commonly used for memory addresses where overflows are ignored. Fortunately, the compiler can easily check for unsigned overflow using a branch instruction. Addition has overflowed if the sum is less than either of the addends, whereas subtraction has overflowed if the difference is greater than the minuend. Appendix A describes the hardware that performs addition and subtraction, which is called an Arithmetic Logic Unit or ALU. Arithmetic Logic Unit (ALU)  Hardware that performs addition, subtraction, and usually logical operations such as AND and OR. FIGURE 3.2  Overflow conditions for addition and subtraction. Hardware/ Software Interface The computer designer must decide how to handle arithmetic overflows. Although some languages like C and Java ignore integer overflow, languages like Ada and Fortran require that the program be notified. The programmer or the programming environment must then decide what to do when an overflow occurs. Summary A major point of this section is that, independent of the representation, the finite word size of computers means that arithmetic operations can create results that are too large to fit in this fixed word size. It’s easy to detect overflow in unsigned numbers, although these are almost always ignored because programs don’t want to detect overflow for address arithmetic, the most common use of natural numbers. Two’s complement presents a greater challenge, yet some software systems require recognizing overflow, so today all computers have a way to detect it.

 3.3  Multiplication Check Yourself Some programming languages allow two’s complement integer arithmetic on variables declared byte and half, whereas RISC-V only has integer arithmetic operations on full words. As we recall from Chapter 2, RISC-V does have data transfer operations for bytes and halfwords. What RISC-V instructions should be generated for byte and halfword arithmetic operations? 1. Load with lb, lh; arithmetic with add, sub, mul, div, using and to mask result to 8 or 16 bits after each operation; then store using sb, sh. 2. Load with lb, lh; arithmetic with add, sub, mul, div; then store using sb, sh. Elaboration:  One feature not generally found in general-purpose microprocessors is saturating operations. Saturation means that when a calculation overflows, the result is set to the largest positive number or the most negative number, rather than a modulo calculation as in two’s complement arithmetic. Saturation is likely what you want for media operations. For example, the volume knob on a radio set would be frustrating if, as you turned it, the volume would get continuously louder for a while and then immediately very soft. A knob with saturation would stop at the highest volume no matter how far you turned it. Multimedia extensions to standard instruction sets often offer saturating arithmetic. Elaboration:  The speed of addition depends on how quickly the carry into the high- order bits is computed. There are a variety of schemes to anticipate the carry so that the worst-case scenario is a function of the log2 of the number of bits in the adder. These anticipatory signals are faster because they go through fewer gates in sequence, but it takes many more gates to anticipate the proper carry. The most popular is carry lookahead, which Section A.6 in Appendix A describes. 3.3 Multiplication Now that we have completed the explanation of addition and subtraction, we are ready to build the more vexing operation of multiplication. First, let’s review the multiplication of decimal numbers in longhand to remind ourselves of the steps of multiplication and the names of the operands. For reasons that will become clear shortly, we limit this decimal example to using only the digits 0 and 1. Multiplying 1000ten by 1001ten: Multiplication is vexation, Division is as bad; The rule of three doth puzzle me, And practice drives me mad. Anonymous, Elizabethan manuscript, 

Chapter 3  Arithmetic for Computers The first operand is called the multiplicand and the second the multiplier. The final result is called the product. As you may recall, the algorithm learned in grammar school is to take the digits of the multiplier one at a time from right to left, multiplying the multiplicand by the single digit of the multiplier, and shifting the intermediate product one digit to the left of the earlier intermediate products. The first observation is that the number of digits in the product is considerably larger than the number in either the multiplicand or the multiplier. In fact, if we ignore the sign bits, the length of the multiplication of an n-bit multiplicand and an m-bit multiplier is a product that is n + m bits long. That is, n + m bits are required to represent all possible products. Hence, like add, multiply must cope with overflow because we frequently want a 32-bit product as the result of multiplying two 32-bit numbers. In this example, we restricted the decimal digits to 0 and 1. With only two choices, each step of the multiplication is simple: 1. Just place a copy of the multiplicand (1 × multiplicand) in the proper place if the multiplier digit is a 1, or 2. Place 0 (0 × multiplicand) in the proper place if the digit is 0. Although the decimal example above happens to use only 0 and 1, multiplication of binary numbers must always use 0 and 1, and thus always offers only these two choices. Now that we have reviewed the basics of multiplication, the traditional next step is to provide the highly optimized multiply hardware. We break with tradition in the belief that you will gain a better understanding by seeing the evolution of the multiply hardware and algorithm through multiple generations. For now, let’s assume that we are multiplying only positive numbers. Sequential Version of the Multiplication Algorithm and Hardware This design mimics the algorithm we learned in grammar school; Figure 3.3 shows the hardware. We have drawn the hardware so that data flow from top to bottom to resemble more closely the paper-and-pencil method. Let’s assume that the multiplier is in the 32-bit multiplier register and that the 64-bit product register is initialized to 0. From the paper-and-pencil example above, it’s clear that we will need to move the multiplicand left one digit each step, as it may be added to the intermediate products. Over 32 steps, a 32-bit multiplicand would move 32 bits to the left. Hence, we need a 64-bit multiplicand register, initialized with the 32-bit multiplicand in the right half and zero in the left half. This register is then shifted left 1 bit each step to align the multiplicand with the sum being accumulated in the 64-bit product register.

 3.3  Multiplication Multiplicand Shift left 64 bits 64-bit ALU Product Write 64 bits Control test Multiplier Shift right 32 bits FIGURE 3.3  First version of the multiplication hardware. The Multiplicand register, ALU, and Product register are all 64 bits wide, with only the Multiplier register containing 32 bits. (Appendix A describes ALUs.) The 32-bit multiplicand starts in the right half of the Multiplicand register and is shifted left 1 bit on each step. The multiplier is shifted in the opposite direction at each step. The algorithm starts with the product initialized to 0. Control decides when to shift the Multiplicand and Multiplier registers and when to write new values into the Product register. Figure 3.4 shows the three basic steps needed for each bit. The least significant bit of the multiplier (Multiplier0) determines whether the multiplicand is added to the Product register. The left shift in step 2 has the effect of moving the intermediate operands to the left, just as when multiplying with paper and pencil. The shift right in step 3 gives us the next bit of the multiplier to examine in the following iteration. These three steps are repeated 32 times to obtain the product. If each step took one clock cycle, this algorithm would require almost 200 clock cycles to multiply two 32-bit numbers. The relative importance of arithmetic operations like multiply varies with the program, but addition and subtraction may be anywhere from 5 to 100 times more popular than multiply. Accordingly, in many applications, multiply can take several clock cycles without significantly affecting performance. However, Amdahl’s Law (see Section 1.10) reminds us that even a moderate frequency for a slow operation can limit performance. This algorithm and hardware are easily refined to take one clock cycle per step. The speed up comes from performing the operations in parallel: the multiplier and multiplicand are shifted while the multiplicand is added to the product if the multiplier bit is a 1. The hardware only has to ensure that it tests the right bit of the multiplier and gets the preshifted version of the multiplicand. The hardware is usually further optimized to halve the width of the adder and registers by noticing where there are unused portions of registers and adders. Figure 3.5 shows the revised hardware.

Chapter 3  Arithmetic for Computers 32nd repetition? 1a. Add multiplicand to product and place the result in Product register Multiplier0 = 0 1. Test Multiplier0 Start Multiplier0 = 1 2. Shift the Multiplicand register left 1 bit 3. Shift the Multiplier register right 1 bit No: <32 repetitions Yes: 32 repetitions Done FIGURE 3.4  The first multiplication algorithm, using the hardware shown in Figure 3.3. If the least significant bit of the multiplier is 1, add the multiplicand to the product. If not, go to the next step. Shift the multiplicand left and the multiplier right in the next two steps. These three steps are repeated 32 times. Hardware/ Software Interface Replacing arithmetic by shifts can also occur when multiplying by constants. Some compilers replace multiplies by short constants with a series of shifts and adds. Because one bit to the left represents a number twice as large in base 2, shifting the bits left has the same effect as multiplying by a power of 2. As mentioned in Chapter 2, almost every compiler will perform the strength reduction optimization of substituting a left shift for a multiply by a power of 2.

 3.3  Multiplication Multiplicand 32 bits 32-bit ALU Product Write 64 bits Control test Shift right FIGURE 3.5  Refined version of the multiplication hardware. Compare with the first version in Figure 3.3. The Multiplicand register and ALU have been reduced to 32 bits. Now the product is shifted right. The separate Multiplier register also disappeared. The multiplier is placed instead in the right half of the Product register, which has grown by one bit to 65 bits to hold the carry-out of the adder. These changes are highlighted in color. FIGURE 3.6  Multiply example using algorithm in Figure 3.4. The bit examined to determine the next step is circled in color. A Multiply Algorithm Using 4-bit numbers to save space, multiply 2ten × 3ten, or 0010two × 0011two. Figure 3.6 shows the value of each register for each of the steps labeled according to Figure 3.4, with the final value of 0000 0110two or 6ten. Color is used to indicate the register values that change on that step, and the bit circled is the one examined to determine the operation of the next step. EXAMPLE ANSWER

Chapter 3  Arithmetic for Computers Signed Multiplication So far, we have dealt with positive numbers. The easiest way to understand how to deal with signed numbers is to first convert the multiplier and multiplicand to positive numbers and then remember their original signs. The algorithms should next be run for 31 iterations, leaving the signs out of the calculation. As we learned in grammar school, we need negate the product only if the original signs disagree. It turns out that the last algorithm will work for signed numbers, if we remember that we are dealing with numbers that have infinite digits, and we are only representing them with 32 bits. Hence, the shifting steps would need to extend the sign of the product for signed numbers. When the algorithm completes, the lower word would have the 32-bit product. Faster Multiplication Moore’s Law provided so much more in resources that hardware designers could build much faster multiplication hardware. Whether the multiplicand is to be added or not is known at the beginning of the multiplication by looking at each of the 32 multiplier bits. Faster multiplications are possible by essentially providing one 32- bit adder for each bit of the multiplier: one input is the multiplicand ANDed with a multiplier bit, and the other is the output of a prior adder. A straightforward approach would be to connect the outputs of adders on the right to the inputs of adders on the left, making a stack of adders 64 high. An alternative way to organize these 32 additions is in a parallel tree, as Figure 3.7 shows. Instead of waiting for 32 add times, we wait just the log2 (32) or five 32-bit add times. In fact, multiply can go even faster than six add times because of the use of carry save adders (see Section A.6 in Appendix A), and because it is easy to pipeline such a design to be able to support many multiplies simultaneously (see Chapter 4). Multiply in RISC-V To produce a properly signed or unsigned 64-bit product, RISC-V has four instructions: multiply (mul), multiply high (mulh), multiply high unsigned (mulhu), and multiply high signed-unsigned (mulhsu). To get the integer 32-bit product, the programmer uses mul. To get the upper 32 bits of the 64-bit product, the programmer uses (mulh) if both operands are signed, (mulhu) if both operands are unsigned, or (mulhsu) if one operand is signed and the other is unsigned. Summary Multiplication hardware simply shifts and adds, as derived from the paper-and- pencil method learned in grammar school. Compilers even use shift instructions 

 3.4  Division Product1 Product0 Product63 Product62 Product47..16 1 bit 1 bit 1 bit 1 bit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32 bits 32 bits 32 bits 32 bits 32 bits 32 bits 32 bits Mplier31 • Mcand Mplier30 • Mcand Mplier29 • Mcand Mplier28 • Mcand Mplier3 • Mcand Mplier2 • Mcand Mplier1 • Mcand Mplier0 • Mcand FIGURE 3.7  Fast multiplication hardware. Rather than use a single 32-bit adder 31 times, this hardware “unrolls the loop” to use 31 adders and then organizes them to minimize delay. for multiplications by powers of 2. With much more hardware we can do the adds in parallel, and do them much faster. 3.4 Division The reciprocal operation of multiply is divide, an operation that is even less frequent and even quirkier. It even offers the opportunity to perform a mathematically invalid operation: dividing by 0. Let’s start with an example of long division using decimal numbers to recall the names of the operands and the division algorithm from grammar school. For Hardware/ Software Interface Software can use the multiply-high instructions to check for overflow from 32-bit multiplication. There is no overflow for 32-bit unsigned multiplication if mulhu’s result is zero. There is no overflow for 32-bit signed multiplication if all of the bits in mulh’s result are copies of the sign bit of mul’s result. dividend  A number being divided. Divide et impera. Latin for “Divide and rule,” ancient political maxim cited by Machiavelli, 1532

Chapter 3  Arithmetic for Computers reasons similar to those in the previous section, we limit the decimal digits to just 0 or 1. The example is dividing 1,001,010ten by 1000ten: Divide’s two operands, called the dividend and divisor, and the result, called the quotient, are accompanied by a second result, called the remainder. Here is another way to express the relationship between the components: Dividend Quotient Divisor Remainder = + × where the remainder is smaller than the divisor. Occasionally, programs use the divide instruction simply to get the remainder, ignoring the quotient. The basic division algorithm from grammar school tries to see how big a number can be subtracted, creating a digit of the quotient on each attempt. Our carefully selected decimal example uses just the numbers 0 and 1, so it’s easy to figure out how many times the divisor goes into the portion of the dividend: it’s either 0 times or 1 time. Binary numbers contain only 0 or 1, so binary division is restricted to these two choices, thereby simplifying binary division. Let’s assume that both the dividend and the divisor are positive and hence the quotient and the remainder are nonnegative. The division operands and both results are 32-bit values, and we will ignore the sign for now. A Division Algorithm and Hardware Figure 3.8 shows hardware to mimic our grammar school algorithm. We start with the 32-bit Quotient register set to 0. Each iteration of the algorithm needs to move the divisor to the right one digit, so we start with the divisor placed in the left half of the 64-bit Divisor register and shift it right 1 bit each step to align it with the dividend. The Remainder register is initialized with the dividend. Figure 3.9 shows three steps of the first division algorithm. Unlike a human, the computer isn’t smart enough to know in advance whether the divisor is smaller than the dividend. It must first subtract the divisor in step 1; remember that this is how we performed comparison. If the result is positive, the divisor was smaller or equal to the dividend, so we generate a 1 in the quotient (step 2a). If the result is negative, the next step is to restore the original value by adding the divisor back to the remainder and generate a 0 in the quotient (step 2b). The divisor is shifted divisor  A number that the dividend is divided by. quotient  The primary result of a division; a number that when multiplied by the divisor and added to the remainder produces the dividend. remainder  The secondary result of a division; a number that when added to the product of the quotient and the divisor produces the dividend.

 3.4  Division right, and then we iterate again. The remainder and quotient will be found in their namesake registers after the iterations complete. A Divide Algorithm Using a 4-bit version of the algorithm to save pages, let’s try dividing 7ten by 2ten, or 0000 0111two by 0010two. Figure 3.10 shows the value of each register for each of the steps, with the quotient being 3ten and the remainder 1ten. Notice that the test in step 2 of whether the remainder is positive or negative simply checks whether the sign bit of the Remainder register is a 0 or 1. The surprising requirement of this algorithm is that it takes n + 1 steps to get the proper quotient and remainder. This algorithm and hardware can be refined to be faster and cheaper. The speed- up comes from shifting the operands and the quotient simultaneously with the subtraction. This refinement halves the width of the adder and registers by noticing Divisor Shift right 64 bits 64-bit ALU Remainder Write 64 bits Control test Quotient Shift left 32 bits FIGURE 3.8  First version of the division hardware. The Divisor register, ALU, and Remainder register are all 64 bits wide, with only the Quotient register being 32 bits. The 32-bit divisor starts in the left half of the Divisor register and is shifted right 1 bit each iteration. The remainder is initialized with the dividend. Control decides when to shift the Divisor and Quotient registers and when to write the new value into the Remainder register. EXAMPLE ANSWER

Chapter 3  Arithmetic for Computers 33rd repetition? 2a. Shift the Quotient register to the left, setting the new rightmost bit to 1 Remainder < 0 Remainder ≥ 0 Test Remainder Start 3. Shift the Divisor register right 1 bit No: <65 repetitions Yes: 65 repetitions Done 1. Subtract the Divisor register from the Remainder register and place the result in the Remainder register 2b. Restore the original value by adding the Divisor register to the Remainder register and placing the sum in the Remainder register. Also shift the Quotient register to the left, setting the new least significant bit to 0 FIGURE 3.9  A division algorithm, using the hardware in Figure 3.8. If the remainder is positive, the divisor did go into the dividend, so step 2a generates a 1 in the quotient. A negative remainder after step 1 means that the divisor did not go into the dividend, so step 2b generates a 0 in the quotient and adds the divisor to the remainder, thereby reversing the subtraction of step 1. The final shift, in step 3, aligns the divisor properly, relative to the dividend for the next iteration. These steps are repeated 33 times.

 3.4  Division FIGURE 3.10  Division example using the algorithm in Figure 3.9. The bit examined to determine the next step is circled in color. where there are unused portions of registers and adders. Figure 3.11 shows the revised hardware. Signed Division So far, we have ignored signed numbers in division. The simplest solution is to remember the signs of the divisor and dividend and then negate the quotient if the signs disagree. Elaboration:  The one complication of signed division is that we must also set the sign of the remainder. Remember that the following equation must always hold: Dividend Quotient Divisor Remainder    To understand how to set the sign of the remainder, let’s look at the example of dividing all the combinations of ±7ten by ±2ten. The first case is easy:         2 Quotient Remainder : , Checking the results:        ( )

Chapter 3  Arithmetic for Computers Divisor 32 bits 32-bit ALU Remainder Write 64 bits Shift left Shift right Control test FIGURE 3.11  An improved version of the division hardware. The Divisor register, ALU, and Quotient register are all 32 bits wide. Compared to Figure 3.8, the ALU and Divisor registers are halved and the remainder is shifted left. This version also combines the Quotient register with the right half of the Remainder register. As in Figure 3.5, the Remainder register has grown to 65 bits to make sure the carry out of the adder is not lost. If we change the sign of the dividend, the quotient must change as well:      2 Quotient : Rewriting our basic formula to calculate the remainder: Remainder Dividend Quotient Divisor              ( ) ( ) ( ) x = So,        2 Quotient 3 Remainder : , Checking the results again:          ( )

 3.4  Division The reason the answer isn’t a quotient of −4 and a remainder of +1, which would also fit this formula, is that the absolute value of the quotient would then change depending on the sign of the dividend and the divisor! Clearly, if ( ) ( ) x y x y  programming would be an even greater challenge. This anomalous behavior is avoided by following the rule that the dividend and remainder must have identical signs, no matter what the signs of the divisor and quotient. We calculate the other combinations by following the same rule:             2 Quotient 3 Remainder 2 Quotient 3 Remainde : , : , r   Thus, the correctly signed division algorithm negates the quotient if the signs of the operands are opposite and makes the sign of the nonzero remainder match the dividend. Faster Division Moore’s Law applies to division hardware as well as multiplication, so we would like to be able to speed up division by throwing hardware at it. We used many adders to speed up multiply, but we cannot do the same trick for divide. The reason is that we need to know the sign of the difference before we can perform the next step of the algorithm, whereas with multiply we could calculate the 32 partial products immediately. There are techniques to produce more than one bit of the quotient per step. The SRT division technique tries to predict several quotient bits per step, using a table lookup based on the upper bits of the dividend and remainder. It relies on subsequent steps to correct wrong predictions. A typical value today is 4 bits. The key is guessing the value to subtract. With binary division, there is only a single choice. These algorithms use 6 bits from the remainder and 4 bits from the divisor to index a table that determines the guess for each step. The accuracy of this fast method depends on having proper values in the lookup table. The Fallacy on page 239 in Section 3.8 shows what can happen if the table is incorrect.

Chapter 3  Arithmetic for Computers Hardware/ Software Interface RISC-V divide instructions ignore overflow, so software must determine whether the quotient is too large. In addition to overflow, division can also result in an improper calculation: division by 0. Some computers distinguish these two anomalous events. RISC-V software must check the divisor to discover division by 0 as well as overflow. Divide in RISC-V You may have already observed that the same sequential hardware can be used for both multiply and divide in Figures 3.5 and 3.11. The only requirement is a 64-bit register that can shift left or right and a 32-bit ALU that adds or subtracts. To handle both signed integers and unsigned integers, RISC-V has two instructions for division and two instructions for remainder: divide (div), divide unsigned (divu), remainder (rem), and remainder unsigned (remu). Summary The common hardware support for multiply and divide allows RISC-V to provide a single pair of 32-bit registers that are used both for multiply and divide. We accelerate division by predicting multiple quotient bits and then correcting mispredictions later. Figure 3.12 summarizes the enhancements to the RISC-V instruction set for the last two sections. Elaboration:  An even faster sequential algorithm than Figure 3.9 does not immediately add the divisor back if the remainder is negative. It simply adds the dividend to the shifted remainder in the following step, since (r + d) × 2 − d = r − 2 + d × 2 − d = r × 2 + d. This nonrestoring division algorithm, which takes one clock cycle per step, is explored further in the exercises; the algorithm in Figure 3.9 is called restoring division. A third algorithm that doesn’t save the result of the subtract if it’s negative is called a nonperforming division algorithm. It averages one-third fewer arithmetic operations.

 3.4  Division . FIGURE 3.12  RISC-V core architecture. RISC-V machine language is listed in the RISC-V Reference Data Card at the front of this book.

Chapter 3  Arithmetic for Computers Speed gets you nowhere if you’re headed the wrong way. American proverb 3.5 Floating Point Going beyond signed and unsigned integers, programming languages support numbers with fractions, which are called reals in mathematics. Here are some examples of reals: 3.14159265… ten (pi) 2.71828… ten (e) 0.000000001ten or 1.0ten × 10−9 (seconds in a nanosecond) 3,155,760,000ten or 3.15576ten × 109 (seconds in a typical century) Notice that in the last case, the number didn’t represent a small fraction, but it was bigger than we could represent with a 32-bit signed integer. The alternative notation for the last two numbers is called scientific notation, which has a single digit to the left of the decimal point. A number in scientific notation that has no leading 0s is called a normalized number, which is the usual way to write it. For example, 1.0ten × 10−9 is in normalized scientific notation, but 0.1ten × 10−8 and 10.0ten × 10−10 are not. Just as we can show decimal numbers in scientific notation, we can also show binary numbers in scientific notation: two .0   To keep a binary number in the normalized form, we need a base that we can increase or decrease by exactly the number of bits the number must be shifted to have one nonzero digit to the left of the decimal point. Only a base of 2 fulfills our need. Since the base is not 10, we also need a new name for decimal point; binary point will do fine. Computer arithmetic that supports such numbers is called floating point because it represents numbers in which the binary point is not fixed, as it is for integers. The programming language C uses the name float for such numbers. Just as in scientific notation, numbers are represented as a single nonzero digit to the left of the binary point. In binary, the form is two .xxxxxxxxx yyyy  (Although the computer represents the exponent in base 2 as well as the rest of the number, to simplify the notation we show the exponent in decimal.) A standard scientific notation for reals in the normalized form offers three advantages. It simplifies exchange of data that includes floating-point numbers; it simplifies the floating-point arithmetic algorithms to know that numbers will scientific notation  A notation that renders numbers with a single digit to the left of the decimal point. normalized  A number in floating-point notation that has no leading 0s. floating point  Computer arithmetic that represents numbers in which the binary point is not fixed.

 3.5  Floating Point always be in this form; and it increases the accuracy of the numbers that can be stored in a word, since real digits to the right of the binary point replace the unnecessary leading 0s. Floating-Point Representation A designer of a floating-point representation must find a compromise between the size of the fraction and the size of the exponent, because a fixed word size means you must take a bit from one to give a bit to the other. This tradeoff is between precision and range: increasing the size of the fraction enhances the precision of the fraction, while increasing the size of the exponent increases the range of numbers that can be represented. As our design guideline from Chapter 2 reminds us, good design demands good compromise. Floating-point numbers are usually a multiple of the size of a word. The representation of a RISC-V floating-point number is shown below, where s is the sign of the floating-point number (1 meaning negative), exponent is the value of the 8-bit exponent field (including the sign of the exponent), and fraction is the 23-bit number. As we recall from Chapter 2, this representation is sign and magnitude, since the sign is a separate bit from the rest of the number. In general, floating-point numbers are of the form ( )    F S E F involves the value in the fraction field and E involves the value in the exponent field; the exact relationship to these fields will be spelled out soon. (We will shortly see that RISC-V does something slightly more sophisticated.) These chosen sizes of exponent and fraction give RISC-V computer arithmetic an extraordinary range. Fractions almost as small as 2.0ten × 10−38 and numbers almost as large as 2.0ten × 1038 can be represented in a computer. Alas, extraordinary differs from infinite, so it is still possible for numbers to be too large. Thus, overflow exceptions can occur in floating-point arithmetic as well as in integer arithmetic. Notice that overflow here means that the exponent is too large to be represented in the exponent field. Floating point offers a new kind of exceptional event as well. Just as programmers will want to know when they have calculated a number that is too large to be represented, they will want to know if the nonzero fraction they are calculating has become so small that it cannot be represented; either event could result in a program giving incorrect answers. To distinguish it from overflow, we call this event underflow. This situation occurs when the negative exponent is too large to fit in the exponent field. fraction  The value, generally between 0 and 1, placed in the fraction field. The fraction is also called the mantissa. exponent  In the numerical representation system of floating-point arithmetic, the value that is placed in the exponent field. overflow (floating- point)  A situation in which a positive exponent becomes too large to fit in the exponent field. underflow (floating- point)  A situation in which a negative exponent becomes too large to fit in the exponent field.

Chapter 3  Arithmetic for Computers One way to reduce the chances of underflow or overflow is to offer another format that has a larger exponent. In C, this number is called double, and operations on doubles are called double precision floating-point arithmetic; single precision floating point is the name of the earlier format. The representation of a double precision floating-point number takes one RISC-V doubleword, as shown below, where s is still the sign of the number, exponent is the value of the 11-bit exponent field, and fraction is the 52-bit number in the fraction field. RISC-V double precision allows numbers almost as small as 2.0ten × 10−308 and almost as large as 2.0ten × 10308. Although double precision does increase the exponent range, its primary advantage is its greater precision because of the much larger fraction. Exceptions and Interrupts What should happen on an overflow or underflow to let the user know that a problem occurred? Some computers signal these events by raising an exception, sometimes called an interrupt. An exception or interrupt is essentially an unscheduled procedure call. The address of the instruction that overflowed is saved in a register, and the computer jumps to a predefined address to invoke the appropriate routine for that exception. The interrupted address is saved so that in some situations the program can continue after corrective code is executed. (Section 4.9 covers exceptions in more detail; Chapter 5 describes other situations where exceptions and interrupts occur.) RISC-V computers do not raise an exception on overflow or underflow; instead, software can read the floating-point control and status register (fcsr) to check whether overflow or underflow has occurred. IEEE 754 Floating-Point Standard These formats go beyond RISC-V. They are part of the IEEE 754 floating-point standard, found in virtually every computer invented since 1980. This standard has greatly improved both the ease of porting floating-point programs and the quality of computer arithmetic. To pack even more bits into the number, IEEE 754 makes the leading 1 bit of normalized binary numbers implicit. Hence, the number is actually 24 bits long in single precision (implied 1 and a 23-bit fraction), and 53 bits long in double precision (1 + 52). To be precise, we use the term significand to represent the 24- or double precision  A floating-point value represented in a 64-bit doubleword. single precision  A floating-point value represented in a 32-bit word. exception  Also called interrupt. An unscheduled event that disrupts program execution; used to detect overflow, for example. interrupt  An exception that comes from outside of the processor. (Some architectures use the term interrupt for all exceptions.)

 3.5  Floating Point 53-bit number that is 1 plus the fraction, and fraction when we mean the 23- or 52-bit number. Since 0 has no leading 1, it is given the reserved exponent value 0 so that the hardware won’t attach a leading 1 to it. Thus 00 … 00two represents 0; the representation of the rest of the numbers uses the form from before with the hidden 1 added: ( ) ( )     Fraction S E where the bits of the fraction represent a number between 0 and 1 and E specifies the value in the exponent field, to be given in detail shortly. If we number the bits of the fraction from left to right s1, s2, s3, …, then the value is ( ) ( ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) )                 s1 s2 s3 s4 S E  Figure 3.13 shows the encodings of IEEE 754 floating-point numbers. Other features of IEEE 754 are special symbols to represent unusual events. For example, instead of interrupting on a divide by 0, software can set the result to a bit pattern representing +∞ or −∞; the largest exponent is reserved for these special symbols. When the programmer prints the results, the program will output an infinity symbol. (For the mathematically trained, the purpose of infinity is to form topological closure of the reals.) IEEE 754 even has a symbol for the result of invalid operations, such as 0/0 or subtracting infinity from infinity. This symbol is NaN, for Not a Number. The purpose of NaNs is to allow programmers to postpone some tests and decisions to a later time in the program when they are convenient. The designers of IEEE 754 also wanted a floating-point representation that could be easily processed by integer comparisons, especially for sorting. This desire is why the sign is in the most significant bit, allowing a quick test of less than, greater than, or equal to 0. (It’s a little more complicated than a simple integer sort, since this notation is essentially sign and magnitude rather than two’s complement.) FIGURE 3.13  IEEE 754 encoding of floating-point numbers. A separate sign bit determines the sign. Denormalized numbers are described in the Elaboration on page 233. This information is also found in Column 4 of the RISC-V Reference Data Card at the front of this book.

Chapter 3  Arithmetic for Computers Placing the exponent before the significand also simplifies the sorting of floating-point numbers using integer comparison instructions, since numbers with bigger exponents look larger than numbers with smaller exponents, as long as both exponents have the same sign. Negative exponents pose a challenge to simplified sorting. If we use two’s complement or any other notation in which negative exponents have a 1 in the most significant bit of the exponent field, a negative exponent will look like a big number. For example, 1.0two × 2−1 would be represented in a single precision as (Remember that the leading 1 is implicit in the significand.) The value 1.0two × 2+1 would look like the smaller binary number The desirable notation must therefore represent the most negative exponent as 00 … 00two and the most positive as 11 … 11two. This convention is called biased notation, with the bias being the number subtracted from the normal, unsigned representation to determine the real value. IEEE 754 uses a bias of 127 for single precision, so an exponent of −1 is represented by the bit pattern of the value −1 + 127ten, or 126ten = 0111 1110two, and +1 is represented by 1 + 127, or 128ten = 1000 0000two. The exponent bias for double precision is 1023. Biased exponent means that the value represented by a floating-point number is really ( ) ( ) ( )     Fraction S Exponent Bias The range of single precision numbers is then from as small as    two .00000000000000000000000 to as large as    two . . Let’s demonstrate.

 3.5  Floating Point Show the IEEE 754 binary representation of the number −0.75ten in single and double precision. The number −0.75ten is also   3/4 or 3/2 ten ten It is also represented by the binary fraction   /2 or two ten two 0. In scientific notation, the value is   .11 two and in normalized scientific notation, it is    two . The general representation for a single precision number is ( ) ( ) ( )      Fraction S Exponent 127 Subtracting the bias 127 from the exponent of −1.1two × 2−1 yields ( ) ( . ) ( )      two 126 127 000 0000 0000 0000 0000 000 The single precision binary representation of −0.75ten is then The double precision representation is ( ) ( .    000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 two 1 22 1 23 ) ( )   Now let’s try going the other direction. EXAMPLE ANSWER

Chapter 3  Arithmetic for Computers EXAMPLE ANSWER Converting Binary to Decimal Floating Point What decimal number does this single precision float represent? The sign bit is 1, the exponent field contains 129, and the fraction field contains 1 × 2−2 = 1/4, or 0.25. Using the basic equation, ( ) ( ) ( ) ( . ) ( ) (            Fraction Exponent Bias 129 1 S ) . . .        In the next few subsections, we will give the algorithms for floating-point addition and multiplication. At their core, they use the corresponding integer operations on the significands, but extra bookkeeping is necessary to handle the exponents and normalize the result. We first give an intuitive derivation of the algorithms in decimal and then give a more detailed, binary version in the figures. Following IEEE guidelines, the IEEE 754 committee was reformed 20 years after the standard to see what changes, if any, should be made. The revised standard IEEE 754-2008 includes nearly all the IEEE 754-1985 and adds a 16-bit format (“half precision”) and a 128-bit format (“quadruple precision”). Half precision has a 1-bit sign, 5-bit exponent (with a bias of 15), and a 10-bit fraction. Quadruple precision has a 1-bit sign, a 15-bit exponent (with a bias of 262143), and a 112-bit fraction. The revised standard also adds decimal floating-point arithmetic. Elaboration:  In an attempt to increase range without removing bits from the significand, some computers before the IEEE 754 standard used a base other than 2. For example, the IBM 360 and 370 mainframe computers used base 16. Since changing the IBM exponent by one means shifting the significand by 4 bits, “normalized” base 16 numbers can have up to 3 leading bits of 0s! Hence, hexadecimal digits mean that up to 3 bits must be dropped from the significand, which leads to surprising problems in the accuracy of floating-point arithmetic. IBM mainframes now support IEEE 754 as well as the old hex format.

 3.5  Floating Point Floating-Point Addition Let’s add numbers in scientific notation by hand to illustrate the problems in floating-point addition: 9.999ten × 101 + 1.610ten × 10−1. Assume that we can store only four decimal digits of the significand and two decimal digits of the exponent. Step 1. To be able to add these numbers properly, we must align the decimal point of the number that has the smaller exponent. Hence, we need a form of the smaller number, 1.610ten × 10−1, that matches the larger exponent. We obtain this by observing that there are multiple representations of an unnormalized floating-point number in scientific notation: ten ten ten . . . 0 0       The number on the right is the version we desire, since its exponent matches the exponent of the larger number, 9.999ten × 101. Thus, the first step shifts the significand of the smaller number to the right until its corrected exponent matches that of the larger number. But we can represent only four decimal digits so, after shifting, the number is really 0 0 . 16 1 1  Step 2. Next comes the addition of the significands:  9 999 0 016 10 015 . . . ten ten ten The sum is 10.015ten × 101. Step 3. This sum is not in normalized scientific notation, so we need to adjust it: ten ten 0 0 . .    After the addition we may have to shift the sum to put it into normalized form, adjusting the exponent appropriately. This example shows shifting to the right, but if one number were positive and the other were negative, it would be possible for the sum to have many leading 0s, requiring left shifts. Whenever the exponent is increased or decreased, we must check for overflow or underflow—that is, we must make sure that the exponent still fits in its field. Step 4. Since we assumed that the significand could be only four digits long (excluding the sign), we must round the number. In our grammar school algorithm, the rules truncate the number if the digit to the right of the desired point is between 0 and 4 and add 1 to the digit if the number to the right is between 5 and 9. The number ten .00 

Chapter 3  Arithmetic for Computers EXAMPLE ANSWER is rounded to four digits in the significand to ten .00  since the fourth digit to the right of the decimal point was between 5 and 9. Notice that if we have bad luck on rounding, such as adding 1 to a string of 9s, the sum may no longer be normalized and we would need to perform step 3 again. Figure 3.14 shows the algorithm for binary floating-point addition that follows this decimal example. Steps 1 and 2 are similar to the example just discussed: adjust the significand of the number with the smaller exponent and then add the two significands. Step 3 normalizes the results, forcing a check for overflow or underflow. The test for overflow and underflow in step 3 depends on the precision of the operands. Recall that the pattern of all 0 bits in the exponent is reserved and used for the floating-point representation of zero. Moreover, the pattern of all 1 bits in the exponent is reserved for indicating values and situations outside the scope of normal floating-point numbers (see the Elaboration on page 233). For the example below, remember that for single precision, the maximum exponent is 127, and the minimum exponent is −126. Binary Floating-Point Addition Try adding the numbers 0.5ten and −0.4375ten in binary using the algorithm in Figure 3.14. Let’s first look at the binary version of the two numbers in normalized scientific notation, assuming that we keep 4 bits of precision: . . . . 1/2 1/2 1. ten ten ten two two two          ten ten ten two two two 7/16 7/2             0 0 0 0 . . . 2 2  Now we follow the algorithm: Step 1. The significand of the number with the lesser exponent (−1.11two × 2−2) is shifted right until its exponent matches the larger number:        two two . . Step 2. Add the significands: two two two . ( . ) . 0 00         

 3.5  Floating Point Still normalized? 4. Round the significand to the appropriate number of bits Yes Overflow or underflow? Start No Yes Done 1. Compare the exponents of the two numbers; shift the smaller number to the right until its exponent would match the larger exponent 2. Add the significands 3. Normalize the sum, either shifting right and incrementing the exponent or shifting left and decrementing the exponent No Exception FIGURE 3.14  Floating-point addition. The normal path is to execute steps 3 and 4 once, but if rounding causes the sum to be unnormalized, we must repeat step 3.

Chapter 3  Arithmetic for Computers Step 3. Normalize the sum, checking for overflow or underflow: 0 00 0 0 0 0 00 . . . . two two two two            Since 127 ≥ −4 ≥ −126, there is no overflow or underflow. (The biased exponent would be −4 + 127, or 123, which is between 1 and 254, the smallest and largest unreserved biased exponents.) Step 4. Round the sum: two .000   The sum already fits exactly in 4 bits, so there is no change to the bits due to rounding. This sum is then 1/2 1/16 two two two ten ten . . . . 0 000 000 0 000 0 0        ten This sum is what we would expect from adding 0.5ten to −0.4375ten. Many computers dedicate hardware to run floating-point operations as fast as possible. Figure 3.15 sketches the basic organization of hardware for floating-point addition. Floating-Point Multiplication Now that we have explained floating-point addition, let’s try floating-point multiplication. We start by multiplying decimal numbers in scientific notation by hand: 1.110ten × 1010 × 9.200ten × 10−5. Assume that we can store only four digits of the significand and two digits of the exponent. Step 1. Unlike addition, we calculate the exponent of the product by simply adding the exponents of the operands together: New exponent     ( ) Let’s do this with the biased exponents as well to make sure we obtain the same result: 10 + 127 = 137, and −5 + 127 = 122, so New exponent    This result is too large for the 8-bit exponent field, so something is amiss! The problem is with the bias because we are adding the biases as well as the exponents: New exponent          ( ) ( ) ( )

 3.5  Floating Point Compare exponents Small ALU Exponent difference Control Exponent Sign Fraction Big ALU Exponent Sign Fraction Shift right Increment or decrement Shift left or right Rounding hardware Exponent Sign Fraction Shift smaller number right Add Normalize Round FIGURE 3.15  Block diagram of an arithmetic unit dedicated to floating-point addition. The steps of Figure 3.14 correspond to each block, from top to bottom. First, the exponent of one operand is subtracted from the other using the small ALU to determine which is larger and by how much. This difference controls the three multiplexors; from left to right, they select the larger exponent, the significand of the smaller number, and the significand of the larger number. The smaller significand is shifted right, and then the significands are added together using the big ALU. The normalization step then shifts the sum left or right and increments or decrements the exponent. Rounding then creates the final result, which may require normalizing again to produce the actual final result.

Chapter 3  Arithmetic for Computers Accordingly, to get the correct biased sum when we add biased numbers, we must subtract the bias from the sum: New exponent         ( ) and 5 is indeed the exponent we calculated initially. Step 2. Next comes the multiplication of the significands: There are three digits to the right of the decimal point for each operand, so the decimal point is placed six digits from the right in the product significand: 1 212 ten . If we can keep only three digits to the right of the decimal point, the product is 10.212 × 105. Step 3. This product is unnormalized, so we need to normalize it: 1 212 1 212 ten ten . .    Thus, after the multiplication, the product can be shifted right one digit to put it in normalized form, adding 1 to the exponent. At this point, we can check for overflow and underflow. Underflow may occur if both operands are small—that is, if both have large negative exponents. Step 4. We assumed that the significand is only four digits long (excluding the sign), so we must round the number. The number 1 212 ten .0  is rounded to four digits in the significand to 1 21 ten .0  Step 5. The sign of the product depends on the signs of the original operands. If they are both the same, the sign is positive; otherwise, it’s negative. Hence, the product is   1 21 ten .0 The sign of the sum in the addition algorithm was determined by addition of the significands, but in multiplication, the signs of the operands determine the sign of the product.

 3.5  Floating Point 5. Set the sign of the product to positive if the signs of the original operands are the same; if they differ make the sign negative Still normalized? 4. Round the significand to the appropriate number of bits Yes Overflow or underflow? Start No Yes Done 1. Add the biased exponents of the two numbers, subtracting the bias from the sum to get the new biased exponent 2. Multiply the significands 3. Normalize the product if necessary, shifting it right and incrementing the exponent No Exception FIGURE 3.16  Floating-point multiplication. The normal path is to execute steps 3 and 4 once, but if rounding causes the sum to be unnormalized, we must repeat step 3.

Chapter 3  Arithmetic for Computers Once again, as Figure 3.16 shows, multiplication of binary floating- point numbers is quite similar to the steps we have just completed. We start with calculating the new exponent of the product by adding the biased exponents, being sure to subtract one bias to get the proper result. Next is multiplication of significands, followed by an optional normalization step. The size of the exponent is checked for overflow or underflow, and then the product is rounded. If rounding leads to further normalization, we once again check for exponent size. Finally, set the sign bit to 1 if the signs of the operands were different (negative product) or to 0 if they were the same (positive product). Binary Floating-Point Multiplication Let’s try multiplying the numbers 0.5ten and −0.4375ten, using the steps in Figure 3.16. In binary, the task is multiplying 1.000two × 2−1 by −1.110two × 2−2. Step 1. Adding the exponents without bias:      ( ) or, using the biased representation: ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )                 Step 2. Multiplying the significands: The product is 1.110000two × 2−3, but we need to keep it to 4 bits, so it is 1.110two × 2−3. Step 3. Now we check the product to make sure it is normalized, and then check the exponent for overflow or underflow. The product is already normalized and, since 127 ≥ −3 ≥ −126, there is no overflow or underflow. (Using the biased representation, 254 ≥ 124 ≥ 1, so the exponent fits.) Step 4. Rounding the product makes no change: EXAMPLE ANSWER

 3.5  Floating Point 1 110 2 3 . two   Step 5. Since the signs of the original operands differ, make the sign of the product negative. Hence, the product is    1 110 2 3 . two Converting to decimal to check our results: The product of 0.5ten and −0.4375ten is indeed −0.21875ten. Floating-Point Instructions in RISC-V RISC-V supports the IEEE 754 single-precision and double-precision formats with these instructions: n Floating-point addition, single (fadd.s) and addition, double (fadd.d) n Floating-point subtraction, single (fsub.s) and subtraction, double (fsub.d) n Floating-point multiplication, single (fmul.s) and multiplication, double (fmul.d) n Floating-point division, single (fdiv.s) and division, double (fdiv.d) n Floating-point square root, single (fsqrt.s) and square root, double (fsqrt.d) n Floating-point equals, single (feq.s) and equals, double (feq.d) n Floating-point less-than, single (flt.s) and less-than, double (flt.d) n Floating-point less-than-or-equals, single (fle.s) and less-than-or-equals, double (fle.d) The comparison instructions, feq, flt, and fle, set an integer register to 0 if the comparison is false and 1 if it is true. Software can thus branch on the result of a floating-point comparison using the integer branch instructions beq and bne. The RISC-V designers decided to add separate floating-point registers. They are called f0, f1, …, f31. Hence, they included separate loads and stores for floating-point registers: fld and fsd for double-precision and flw and fsw for single-precision. The base registers for floating-point data transfers which are used for addresses remain integer registers. The RISC-V code to load two single precision numbers from memory, add them, and then store the sum might look like this: flw     f0, 0(x10) //  Load 32-bit F.P. number into f0 flw     f1, 4(x10) //  Load 32-bit F.P. number into f1 fadd.s f2, f0, f1  //  f2 = f0 + f1, single precision fsw     f2, 8(x10) //  Store 32-bit F.P. number from f2              1 110 0 001110 0 00111 7 2 7 32 . . . / / two two two ten ten 0 21875 . ten

Chapter 3  Arithmetic for Computers A single precision register is just the lower half of a double-precision register. Note that, unlike integer register x0, floating-point register f0 is not hard-wired to the constant 0. Figure 3.17 summarizes the floating-point portion of the RISC-V architecture revealed in this chapter, with the new pieces to support floating point shown in color. The floating-point instructions use the same format as their integer counterparts: loads use the I-type format, stores use the S-type format, and arithmetic instructions use the R-type format. FIGURE 3.17  RISC-V floating-point architecture revealed thus far. This information is also found in column 2 of the RISC-V Reference Data Card at the front of this book.

 3.5  Floating Point Compiling a Floating-Point C Program into RISC-V Assembly Code Let’s convert a temperature in Fahrenheit to Celsius: float f2c (float fahr) { return ((5.0f/9.0f) *(fahr – 32.0f)); } Assume that the floating-point argument fahr is passed in f10 and the result should also go in f10. What is the RISC-V assembly code? We assume that the compiler places the three floating-point constants in memory within easy reach of register x3. The first two instructions load the constants 5.0 and 9.0 into floating-point registers: f2c: flw f0, const5(x3) // f0 = 5.0f flw f1, const9(x3) // f1 = 9.0f They are then divided to get the fraction 5.0/9.0: fdiv.s f0, f0, f1 // f0 = 5.0f / 9.0f One issue that architects face in supporting floating-point arithmetic is whether to select the same registers used by the integer instructions or to add a special set for floating point. Because programs normally perform integer operations and floating-point operations on different data, separating the registers will only slightly increase the number of instructions needed to execute a program. The major impact is to create a distinct set of data transfer instructions to move data between floating-point registers and memory. The benefits of separate floating-point registers are having twice as many registers without using up more bits in the instruction format, having twice the register bandwidth by having separate integer and floating-point register sets, and being able to customize registers to floating point; for example, some computers convert all sized operands in registers into a single internal format. Hardware/ Software Interface EXAMPLE ANSWER

Chapter 3  Arithmetic for Computers EXAMPLE ANSWER (Many compilers would divide 5.0 by 9.0 at compile time and save the single constant 5.0/9.0 in memory, thereby avoiding the divide at runtime.) Next, we load the constant 32.0 and then subtract it from fahr (f10): flw f1, const32(x3) // f1 = 32.0f fsub.s f10, f10, f1 // f10 = fahr – 32.0f Finally, we multiply the two intermediate results, placing the product in f10 as the return result, and then return fmul.s f10, f0, f10 // f10 = (5.0f / 9.0f)*(fahr – 32.0f) jalr    x0, 0(x1) // return Now let’s perform floating-point operations on matrices, code commonly found in scientific programs. Compiling Floating-Point C Procedure with Two-Dimensional Matrices into RISC-V Most floating-point calculations are performed in double precision. Let’s per- form matrix multiply of C = C + A * B. This code is a simplified version of the DGEMM program in Figure 2.43 on page 169. Let’s assume C, A, and B are all square matrices with 32 elements in each dimension. void mm (double c[][], double a[][], double b[][]) { size_t i, j, k; for (i = 0; i < 32; i = i + 1) for (j = 0; j < 32; j = j + 1) for (k = 0; k < 32; k = k + 1) c[i][j] = c[i][j] + a[i][k] *b[k][j]; } The array starting addresses are parameters, so they are in x10, x11, and x12. Assume that the integer variables are in x5, x6, and x7, respectively. What is the RISC-V assembly code for the body of the procedure? Note that c[i][j] is used in the innermost loop above. Since the loop index is k, the index does not affect c[i][j], so we can avoid loading and storing 

 3.5  Floating Point c[i][j] each iteration. Instead, the compiler loads c[i][j] into a register outside the loop, accumulates the sum of the products of a[i][k] and b[k][j] in that same register, and then stores the sum into c[i][j] upon termination of the innermost loop. The body of the procedure starts with saving the loop termination value of 32 in a temporary register and then initializing the three for loop variables:     mm:... addi x28, x0, 32    //  x28 = 32 (row size/loop end) addi x5, x0, 0 //  i = 0; initialize 1st for loop L1: addi x6, x0, 0 //  j = 0; initialize 2nd for loop L2: addi x7, x0, 0 //  k = 0; initialize 3rd for loop To calculate the address of c[i][j], we need to know how a 32 × 32, two- dimensional array is stored in memory. As you might expect, its layout is the same as if there were 32 single-dimensional arrays, each with 32 elements. So the first step is to skip over the i “single-dimensional arrays,” or rows, to get the one we want. Thus, we multiply the index in the first dimension by the size of the row, 32. Since 32 is a power of 2, we can use a shift instead: slli  x30, x5, 5    //  x30 = i * 25(size of row of c) Now we add the second index to select the jth element of the desired row: add  x30, x30, x6    //  x30 = i * size(row) + j To turn this sum into a byte index, we multiply it by the size of a matrix element in bytes. Since each element is 8 bytes for double precision, we can instead shift left by 3 since 8 is a power of 2: slli  x30, x30, 3    //  x30 = byte offset of [i][j] Next we add this sum to the base address of c, giving the address of c[i][j], and then load the double-precision number c[i][j] into f0: add x30, x10, x30  //  x30 = byte address of c[i][j] fld  f0, 0(x30)    //  f0 = 8 bytes of c[i][j] The following five instructions are virtually identical to the last five: calculate the address and then load the double-precision number b[k][j]. L3: slli x29, x7, 5 //  x29 = k * 25(size of row of b) add x29, x29, x6 //  x29 = k * size(row) + j slli x29, x29, 3 //  x29 = byte offset of [k][j] add x29, x12, x29 //  x29 = byte address of b[k][j] fld f1, 0(x29) //  f1 = 8 bytes of b[k][j]

Chapter 3  Arithmetic for Computers Similarly, the next five instructions are like the last five: calculate the address and then load the double-precision number a[i][k]. slli  x29, x5, 5 //  x29 = i * 25(size of row of a) add x29, x29, x7 //  x29 = i * size(row) + k slli  x29, x29, 3 //  x29 = byte offset of [i][k] add x29, x11, x29  //  x29 = byte address of a[i][k] fld f2, 0(x29) //  f2 = a[i][k] Now that we have loaded all the data, we are finally ready to do some floating- point operations! We multiply elements of a and b located in registers f2 and f1, and then accumulate the sum in f0. fmul.d  f1, f2, f1  // f1 = a[i][k] * b[k][j] fadd.d  f0, f0, f1  // f0 = c[i][j] + a[i][k] * b[k][j] The final block increments the index k and loops back if the index is not 32. If it is 32, and thus the end of the innermost loop, we need to store the sum accumulated in f0 into c[i][j]. addi  x7, x7, 1 //  k = k + 1 bltu  x7, x28, L3  //  if (k < 32) go to L3 fsd f0, 0(x30) //  c[i][j] = f0 Similarly, these final six instructions increment the index variable of the middle and outermost loops, looping back if the index is not 32 and exiting if the index is 32. addi x6, x6, 1 //  j = j + 1 bltu x6, x28, L2  //  if (j < 32) go to L2 addi x5, x5, 1 //  i = i + 1 bltu x5, x28, L1 //  if (i < 32) go to L1 . . . Looking ahead, Figure 3.20 below shows the x86 assembly language code for a slightly different version of DGEMM in Figure 3.19. Elaboration:  C and many other programming languages use the array layout discussed in the example, called row-major order. Fortran instead uses column-major order, whereby the array is stored column by column.

 3.5  Floating Point Elaboration:  Another reason for separate integers and floating-point registers is that microprocessors in the 1980s didn’t have enough transistors to put the floating- point unit on the same chip as the integer unit. Hence, the floating-point unit, including the floating-point registers, was optionally available as a second chip. Such optional accelerator chips are called coprocessor chips. Since the early 1990s, microprocessors have integrated floating point (and just about everything else) on chip. Elaboration:  As mentioned in Section 3.4, accelerating division is more challenging than multiplication. In addition to SRT, another technique to leverage a fast multiplier is Newton’s iteration, where division is recast as finding the zero of a function to produce the reciprocal 1/c, which is then multiplied by the other operand. Iteration techniques cannot be rounded properly without calculating many extra bits. A TI chip solved this problem by calculating an extra-precise reciprocal. Elaboration:  Java embraces IEEE 754 by name in its definition of Java floating-point data types and operations. Thus, the code in the first example could have well been generated for a class method that converted Fahrenheit to Celsius. The second example above uses multiple dimensional arrays, which are not explicitly supported in Java. Java allows arrays of arrays, but each array may have its own length, unlike multiple dimensional arrays in C. Like the examples in Chapter 2, a Java version of this second example would require a good deal of checking code for array bounds, including a new length calculation at the end of row accesses. It would also need to check that the object reference is not null. Accurate Arithmetic Unlike integers, which can represent exactly every number between the smallest and largest number, floating-point numbers are normally approximations for a number they can’t really represent. The reason is that an infinite variety of real numbers exists between, say, 1 and 2, but no more than 253 can be represented exactly in double precision floating point. The best we can do is getting the floating-point representation close to the actual number. Thus, IEEE 754 offers several modes of rounding to let the programmer pick the desired approximation. Rounding sounds simple enough, but to round accurately requires the hardware to include extra bits in the calculation. In the preceding examples, we were vague on the number of bits that an intermediate representation can occupy, but clearly, if every intermediate result had to be truncated to the exact number of digits, there would be no opportunity to round. IEEE 754, therefore, always keeps two extra bits on the right during intervening additions, called guard and round, respectively. Let’s do a decimal example to illustrate their value. guard  The first of two extra bits kept on the right during intermediate calculations of floating- point numbers; used to improve rounding accuracy. round  Method to make the intermediate floating-point result fit the floating-point format; the goal is typically to find the nearest number that can be represented in the format. It is also the name of the second of two extra bits kept on the right during intermediate floating- point calculations, which improves rounding accuracy.

Chapter 3  Arithmetic for Computers EXAMPLE ANSWER Rounding with Guard Digits Add 2.56ten × 100 to 2.34ten × 102, assuming that we have three significant decimal digits. Round to the nearest decimal number with three significant decimal digits, first with guard and round digits, and then without them. First we must shift the smaller number to the right to align the exponents, so 2.56ten × 100 becomes 0.0256ten × 102. Since we have guard and round digits, we are able to represent the two least significant digits when we align exponents. The guard digit holds 5 and the round digit holds 6. The sum is 2 3400 0 0256 2 3656 . . . ten ten ten  Thus the sum is 2.3656ten × 102. Since we have two digits to round, we want values 0 to 49 to round down and 51 to 99 to round up, with 50 being the tiebreaker. Rounding the sum up with three significant digits yields 2.37ten × 102. Doing this without guard and round digits drops two digits from the calculation. The new sum is then 2 34 0 02 2 36 . . . ten ten ten  The answer is 2.36ten × 102, off by 1 in the last digit from the sum above. Since the worst case for rounding would be when the actual number is halfway between two floating-point representations, accuracy in floating point is normally measured in terms of the number of bits in error in the least significant bits of the significand; the measure is called the number of units in the last place, or ulp. If a number were off by 2 in the least significant bits, it would be called off by 2 ulps. Provided there are no overflow, underflow, or invalid operation exceptions, IEEE 754 guarantees that the computer uses the number that is within one-half ulp. Elaboration:  Although the example above really needed just one extra digit, multiply can require two. A binary product may have one leading 0 bit; hence, the normalizing step must shift the product one bit left. This shifts the guard digit into the least significant bit of the product, leaving the round bit to help accurately round the product. IEEE 754 has four rounding modes: always round up (toward +∞), always round down (toward −∞), truncate, and round to nearest even. The final mode determines what to do if the number is exactly halfway in between. The U.S. Internal Revenue Service (IRS) always rounds 0.50 dollars up, possibly to the benefit of the IRS. A more equitable way units in the last place (ulp)  The number of bits in error in the least significant bits of the significand between the actual number and the number that can be represented.

 3.5  Floating Point would be to round up this case half the time and round down the other half. IEEE 754 says that if the least significant bit retained in a halfway case would be odd, add one; if it’s even, truncate. This method always creates a 0 in the least significant bit in the tie-breaking case, giving the rounding mode its name. This mode is the most commonly used, and the only one that Java supports. The goal of the extra rounding bits is to allow the computer to get the same results as if the intermediate results were calculated to infinite precision and then rounded. To support this goal and round to the nearest even, the standard has a third bit in addition to guard and round; it is set whenever there are nonzero bits to the right of the round bit. This sticky bit allows the computer to see the difference between 0.50 … 00ten and 0.50 … 01ten when rounding. The sticky bit may be set, for example, during addition, when the smaller number is shifted to the right. Suppose we added 5.01ten × 10−1 to 2.34ten × 102 in the example above. Even with guard and round, we would be adding 0.0050 to 2.34, with a sum of 2.3450. The sticky bit would be set, since there are nonzero bits to the right. Without the sticky bit to remember whether any 1s were shifted off, we would assume the number is equal to 2.345000 … 00 and round to the nearest even of 2.34. With the sticky bit to remember that the number is larger than 2.345000 … 00, we round instead to 2.35. Elaboration:  RISC-V, MIPS-64, PowerPC, AMD SSE5, and Intel AVX architectures all provide a single instruction that does a multiply and add on three registers: a = a + (b × c). Obviously, this instruction allows potentially higher floating-point performance for this common operation. Equally important is that instead of performing two roundings—after the multiply and then after the add—which would happen with separate instructions, the multiply add instruction can perform a single rounding after the add. A single rounding step increases the precision of multiply add. Such operations with a single rounding are called fused multiply add. It was added to the revised IEEE 754-2008 standard (see Section 3.11). sticky bit  A bit used in rounding in addition to guard and round that is set whenever there are nonzero bits to the right of the round bit. fused multiply add  A floating-point instruction that performs both a multiply and an add, but rounds only once after the add. Summary The Big Picture that follows reinforces the stored-program concept from Chapter 2; the meaning of the information cannot be determined just by looking at the bits, for the same bits can represent a variety of objects. This section shows that computer arithmetic is finite and thus can disagree with natural arithmetic. For example, the IEEE 754 standard floating-point representation ( ) ( ) ( )      Fraction Exponent Bias is almost always an approximation of the real number. Computer systems must take care to minimize this gap between computer arithmetic and arithmetic in the real world, and programmers at times need to be aware of the implications of this approximation. The BIG Picture Bit patterns have no inherent meaning. They may represent signed integers, unsigned integers, floating-point numbers, instructions, character strings, and so on. What is represented depends on the instruction that operates on the bits in the word.

Chapter 3  Arithmetic for Computers The major difference between computer numbers and numbers in the real world is that computer numbers have limited size and hence limited precision; it’s possible to calculate a number too big or too small to be represented in a computer word. Programmers must remember these limits and write programs accordingly. Hardware/ Software Interface Check Yourself C type Java type Data transfers Operations int int lw, sw add, sub, addi, mul, mulh, mulhu, mulhsu, div, divu, rem, remu, and, andi, or, ori, xor, xori unsigned int — lw, sw add, sub, addi, mul, mulh, mulhu, mulhsu, div, divu, rem, remu, and, andi, or, ori, xor, xori char — lb, sb add, sub, addi, mul, div, divu, rem, remu, and, andi, or, ori, xor, xori short char lh, sh add, sub, addi, mul, div, divu, rem, remu, and, andi, or, ori, xor, xori float float flw, fsw fadd.s, fsub.s, fmul.s, fdiv.s, feq.s, flt.s, fle.s double double fld, fsd fadd.d, fsub.d, fmul.d, fdiv.d, feq.d, flt.d, fle.d The revised IEEE 754-2008 standard added a 16-bit floating-point format with five exponent bits. What do you think is the likely range of numbers it could represent? 1. 1.0000 00 × 20 to 1.1111 1111 11 × 231, 0 2. ±1.0000 0000 0 × 2−14 to ± 1.1111 1111 1 × 215, ± 0, ± ∞, NaN 3. ±1.0000 0000 00 × 2−14 to ± 1.1111 1111 11 × 215, ± 0, ± ∞, NaN 4. ±1.0000 0000 00 × 2−15 to ± 1.1111 1111 11 × 214, ± 0, ± ∞, NaN In the last chapter, we presented the storage classes of the programming language C (see the Hardware/Software Interface section in Section 2.7). The table above shows some of the C and Java data types, the data transfer instructions, and instructions that operate on those types that appear in Chapter 2 and this chapter. Note that Java omits unsigned integers.

 3.6  Parallelism and Computer Arithmetic: Subword Parallelism Elaboration:  To accommodate comparisons that may include NaNs, the standard includes ordered and unordered as options for compares. RISC-V does not provide instructions for unordered comparisons, but a careful sequence of ordered comparisons has the same effect. (Java does not support unordered compares.) In an attempt to squeeze every bit of precision from a floating-point operation, the standard allows some numbers to be represented in unnormalized form. Rather than having a gap between 0 and the smallest normalized number, IEEE allows denormalized numbers (also known as denorms or subnormals). They have the same exponent as zero but a nonzero fraction. They allow a number to degrade in significance until it becomes 0, called gradual underflow. For example, the smallest positive single precision normalized number is 1 00000000000000000000000 2 126 . two   but the smallest single precision denormalized number is 0 00000000000000000000001 1 0 . , . two two     or For double precision, the denorm gap goes from 1.0 × 2−1022 to 1.0 × 2−1074. The possibility of an occasional unnormalized operand has given headaches to floating-point designers who are trying to build fast floating-point units. Hence, many computers cause an exception if an operand is denormalized, letting software complete the operation. Although software implementations are perfectly valid, their lower performance has lessened the popularity of denorms in portable floating-point software. Moreover, if programmers do not expect denorms, their programs may surprise them. 3.6 Parallelism and Computer Arithmetic: Subword Parallelism Since every microprocessor in a phone, tablet, or laptop by definition has its own graphical display, as transistor budgets increased it was inevitable that support would be added for graphics operations. Many graphics systems originally used 8 bits to represent each of the three primary colors plus 8 bits for a location of a pixel. The addition of speakers and microphones for teleconferencing and video games suggested support of sound as well. Audio samples need more than 8 bits of precision, but 16 bits are sufficient. Every microprocessor has special support so that bytes and halfwords take up less space when stored in memory (see Section 2.9), but due to the infrequency of arithmetic operations on these data sizes in typical integer programs, there was little support beyond data transfers. Architects recognized that many graphics and audio applications would perform the same operation on vectors of these data. By partitioning the carry chains within a 128-bit adder, a processor could use parallelism to perform simultaneous operations on short vectors of sixteen 8-bit operands, eight 16-bit operands, four 32-bit operands, or two 64-bit operands.

Chapter 3  Arithmetic for Computers FIGURE 3.18  The SSE/SSE2 floating-point instructions of the x86. xmm means one operand is a 128-bit SSE2 register, and {mem|xmm} means the other operand is either in memory or it is an SSE2 register. The table uses regular expressions to show the variations of instructions. Thus, MOV[AU]{SS|PS|SD|PD} represents the eight instructions MOVASS,MOVAPS,MOVASD,MOVAPD,MOVUSS,MOVUPS,MOVUSD, and MOVUPD. We use square brackets [] to show single-letter alternatives: A means the 128-bit operand is aligned in memory; U means the 128-bit operand is unaligned in memory; H means move the high half of the 128-bit operand; and L means move the low half of the 128-bit operand. We use the curly brackets {} with a vertical bar | to show multiple letter variations of the basic operations: SS stands for Scalar Single precision floating point, or one 32-bit operand in a 128-bit register; PS stands for Packed Single precision floating point, or four 32-bit operands in a 128-bit register; SD stands for Scalar Double precision floating point, or one 64-bit operand in a 128-bit register; PD stands for Packed Double precision floating point, or two 64-bit operands in a 128-bit register. The cost of such partitioned adders was small yet the speedups could be large. Given that the parallelism occurs within a wide word, the extensions are classified as subword parallelism. It is also classified under the more general name of data level parallelism. They are known as well as vector or SIMD, for single instruction, multiple data (see Section 6.6). The rising popularity of multimedia applications led to arithmetic instructions that support narrower operations that can easily compute in parallel. As of this writing, additional instructions to exploit subword parallelism are still under development by RISC-V International, but the next section presents a real-world example of such an architecture. 3.7 Real Stuff: Streaming SIMD Extensions and Advanced Vector Extensions in x86 The original MMX (MultiMedia eXtension) for the x86 included instructions that operate on short vectors of integers. Later, SSE (Streaming SIMD Extension) provided instructions that operate on short vectors of single-precision floating-point numbers. Chapter 2 notes that in 2001 Intel added 144 instructions to its architecture as part of SSE2, including double precision floating-point registers and operations. It included eight 64-bit registers that can be used for floating-point operands. AMD expanded the number to 16 registers, called XMM, as part of AMD64, which Intel relabeled EM64T for its use. Figure 3.18 summarizes the SSE and SSE2 instructions.

 3.7  Real Stuff: Streaming SIMD Extensions and Advanced Vector Extensions in x86 In addition to holding a single-precision or double-precision number in a register, Intel allows multiple floating-point operands to be packed into a single 128-bit SSE2 register: four single precision or two double precision. Thus, the 16 floating-point registers for SSE2 are actually 128 bits wide. If the operands can be arranged in memory as 128-bit aligned data, then 128-bit data transfers can load and store multiple operands per instruction. This packed floating-point format is supported by arithmetic operations that can compute simultaneously on four singles (PS) or two doubles (PD). In 2011, Intel doubled the width of the registers again, now called YMM, with Advanced Vector Extensions (AVX). Thus, a single operation can now specify eight 32-bit floating-point operations or four 64-bit floating-point operations. The legacy SSE and SSE2 instructions now operate on the lower 128 bits of the YMM registers. Thus, to go from 128- and 256-bit operations, you prepend the letter “v” (for vector) in front of the SSE2 assembly language operations and then use the YMM register names instead of the XMM register name. For example, the SSE2 instruction to perform two 64-bit floating-point additions addpd  %xmm0, %xmm4 becomes vaddpd  %ymm0, %ymm4 which now produces four 64-bit floating-point multiplies. In 2015, Intel doubled the registers again to 512 bits, now called ZIMM, with AVX512 in some of its microprocessors. Intel has announced plans to widen the AVX registers to 1024 bits in later editions of the x86 architecture. Elaboration:  AVX also added three address instructions to x86. For example, vaddpd can now specify vaddpd  %ymm0, %ymm1, %ymm4    // %ymm4 = %ymm0 + %ymm1 instead of the standard, two address version addpd  %xmm0, %xmm4  // %xmm4 = %xmm4 + %xmm0 (Unlike RISC-V, the destination is on the right in x86.) Three addresses can reduce the number of registers and instructions needed for a computation.

Chapter 3  Arithmetic for Computers 3.8 Going Faster: Subword Parallelism and Matrix Multiply Recall that Figure 2.43 on page 169 shows an unoptimized version of DGEMM in C. To demonstrate the performance impact of subword parallelism, we rerun the code using AVX. While compiler writers may eventually be able to routinely produce high-quality code that uses the AVX instructions of the x86, for now we must “cheat” by using C intrinsics that more or less tell the compiler exactly how to produce good code. Figure 3.19 Shows the enhanced version of Figure 2.43. The declaration on line 7 of Figure 3.19 uses the __m512d data type, which tells the compiler the variable will hold eight double-precision floating-point values (8 x 64 bits = 512 bits). The intrinsic _mm512_load_pd(), also on line 7, uses AVX instructions to load eight double-precision floating-point numbers in parallel (_pd) from the matrix C into c0. The address calculation C+i+j*n represents element C[i+j*n]. Symmetrically, the final step on line 13 uses the intrinsic _ mm256_store_pd() to store eight double-precision floating-point numbers from c0 into the matrix C. As we are going through eight elements each iteration, the outer for loop on line 4 increments i by 8 instead of by 1 as on line 3 of Figure 2.43 of Chapter 2. Inside the loops, on line 10 we first load eight elements of A again using _ mm512_ load_pd(). To multiply these elements by one element of B, we first use the intrinsic _mm512_broadcast_sd(), which makes eight identical copies of the scalar double-precision number—in this case an element of B—in one of the ZMM registers. We then use _mm512_fmadd_pd on line 11 to multiply the eight double-precision results in parallel and then add the eight products to the eight sums in c0. Figure 3.20 shows resulting x86 code for the body of the inner loops produced by the compiler. You can see the four AVX512 instructions—they all start with v and use pd for parallel double precision—that correspond to the C intrinsics mentioned above. The code is very similar to that in Figure 2.44 of Chapter 2: the integer instructions are nearly identical (but different registers), and the floating-point instruction differences are generally just going from scalar double (sd) using XMM registers to parallel double (pd) with ZMM registers. One exception is line 4 of Figure 3.20. Every element of A must be multiplied by one element of B. One solution is to place eight identical copies of the 64- bit B element side by side into the 512-bit ZMM register, which is just what the instruction vbroadcastsd does. The other difference is that the original program has separate multiply and add floating-point operations, whereas the AVX512 version uses a single floating point operation in line 6 that performs multiply and add. The AVX version is 7.8 times as fast, which is very close to the factor of an 8.0 increase you might hope for from performing eight times as many operations at a time by using subword parallelism.

 3.8  Going Faster: Subword Parallelism and Matrix Multiply FIGURE 3.19  Optimized version of DGEMM using C intrinsics to generate AVX512 subword-parallel instructions for the x86. Figure 3.20 shows the assembly language produced by the compiler for the inner loop. 1. //include <x86intrin.h> 2. void dgemm (size_t n, double* A, double* B, double* C) 3. { 4. for ( size_t i = 0; i < n; i+=4 ) 5. for ( size_t j = 0; j < n; j++ ) { 6. __m256d c0 = _mm256_load_pd(C+i+j*n); /* c0 = C[i][j] */ 7. for( size_t k = 0; k < n; k++ ) 8. c0 = _mm256_add_pd(c0, /* c0 += A[i][k]*B[k][j] */ 9. _mm256_mul_pd(_mm256_load_pd(A+i+k*n), 10. _mm256_broadcast_sd(B+k+j*n))); 11. _mm256_store_pd(C+i+j*n, c0); /* C[i][j] = c0 */ 12. } 13. } FIGURE 3.20  The x86 assembly language for the body of the nested loops generated by compiling the optimized C code in Figure 3.19. Note the similarities to Figure 2.44 of Chapter 2, with the primary difference being that the original floating-point operations are now using ZMM registers and the pd versions of the instructions for parallel double precision instead of the sd version for scalar double precision, and it is performing a single multiply-add instruction instead of separate multiply and add instruction. 1. vmovsd (%r10),%xmm0 # Load 1 element of C into %xmm0 2. mov %rsi,%rcx # register %rcx = %rsi 3. xor %eax,%eax # register %eax = 0 4. vmovsd (%rcx),%xmm1 # Load 1 element of B into %xmm1 5. add %r9,%rcx # register %rcx = %rcx + %r9 6. vmulsd (%r8,%rax,8),%xmm1,%xmm1 # Multiply %xmm1, element of A 7. add $0x1,%rax # register %rax = %rax + 1 8. cmp %eax,%edi # compare %eax to %edi 9. vaddsd %xmm1,%xmm0,%xmm0 # Add %xmm1, %xmm0 10. jg 30 <dgemm+0x30> # jump if %eax > %edi 11. add $0x1,%r11 # register %r11 = %r11 + 1 12. vmovsd %xmm0,(%r10) # Store %xmm0 into C element

Chapter 3  Arithmetic for Computers Recall that a binary number x, where xi means the ith bit, represents the number …        ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) x x x x Shifting the bits of c right by n bits would seem to be the same as dividing by 2n. And this is true for unsigned integers. The problem is with signed integers. For example, suppose we want to divide −5ten by 4ten; the quotient should be −1ten. The two’s complement representation of −5ten is 11111111 11111111 11111111 11111011two According to this fallacy, shifting right by two should divide by 4ten (22): 00111111 11111111 11111111 11111110two With a 0 in the sign bit, this result is clearly wrong. The value created by the shift right is actually 4,611,686,018,427,387,902ten instead of −1ten. A solution would be to have an arithmetic right shift that extends the sign bit instead of shifting in 0s. A 2-bit arithmetic shift right of −5ten produces 11111111 11111111 11111111 11111110two The result is −2ten instead of −1ten; close, but no cigar. Pitfall:  Floating-point addition is not associative. Associativity holds for a sequence of two’s complement integer additions, even if the computation overflows. Alas, because floating-point numbers are approximations of real numbers and because computer arithmetic has limited precision, it does not hold for floating-point numbers. Given the great range of numbers that can be represented in floating point, problems occur when adding two large numbers of opposite signs plus a small number. For example, let’s see if c + (a + b) = (c + a) + b. Assume c = −1.5ten × 1038, a = 1.5ten × 1038, and b = 1.0, and that these are all single precision numbers. 3.9 Fallacies and Pitfalls Arithmetic fallacies and pitfalls generally stem from the difference between the limited precision of computer arithmetic and the unlimited precision of natural arithmetic. Fallacy:  Just as a left shift instruction can replace an integer multiply by a power of 2, a right shift is the same as an integer division by a power of 2. Thus mathematics may be defined as the subject in which we never know what we are talking about, nor whether what we are saying is true. Bertrand Russell, Recent Words on the Principles of Mathematics, 1901

 3.9  Fallacies and Pitfalls c a b ( ) . ( . . ) . ( . 1 5 1 5 1 0 1 5 1 5 ten ten ten ten ten ten ten 0 0 1 5 1 5 1 0 0 0 ) . ( . . ) . ( . ) . . 1 0 1 0 (c + a ) + b Since floating-point numbers have limited precision and result in approximations of real results, 1.5ten × 1038 is so much larger than 1.0ten that 1.5ten × 1038 + 1.0 is still 1.5ten × 1038. That is why the sum of c, a, and b is 0.0 or 1.0, depending on the order of the floating-point additions, so c + (a + b) ≠ (c + a) + b. Therefore, floating- point addition is not associative. Fallacy:  Parallel execution strategies that work for integer data types also work for floating-point data types. Programs have typically been written first to run sequentially before being rewritten to run concurrently, so a natural question is, “Do the two versions get the same answer?” If the answer is no, you presume there is a bug in the parallel version that you need to track down. This approach assumes that computer arithmetic does not affect the results when going from sequential to parallel. That is, if you were to add a million numbers together, you would get the same results whether you used one processor or 1000 processors. This assumption holds for two’s complement integers, since integer addition is associative. Alas, since floating-point addition is not associative, the assumption does not hold. A more vexing version of this fallacy occurs on a parallel computer where the operating system scheduler may use a different number of processors depending on what other programs are running on a parallel computer. As the varying number of processors from each run would cause the floating-point sums to be calculated in different orders, getting slightly different answers each time despite running identical code with identical input may flummox unaware parallel programmers. Given this quandary, programmers who write parallel code with floating-point numbers need to verify whether the results are credible, even if they don’t give the exact same answer as the sequential code. The field that deals with such issues is called numerical analysis, which is the subject of textbooks in its own right. Such concerns are one reason for the popularity of numerical libraries such as LAPACK and ScaLAPAK, which have been validated in both their sequential and parallel forms. Fallacy:  Only theoretical mathematicians care about floating-point accuracy. Newspaper headlines of November 1994 prove this statement is a fallacy (see Figure 3.21). The following is the inside story behind the headlines. The Pentium uses a standard floating-point divide algorithm that generates multiple quotient bits per step, using the most significant bits of divisor and dividend to guess the next 2 bits of the quotient. The guess is taken from a lookup table containing −2, −1, 0, +1, or +2. The guess is multiplied by the divisor and subtracted from the remainder 

Chapter 3  Arithmetic for Computers to generate a new remainder. Like nonrestoring division, if a previous guess gets too large a remainder, the partial remainder is adjusted in a subsequent pass. Evidently, there were five elements of the table from the 80486 that Intel engineers thought could never be accessed, and they optimized the PLA to return 0 instead of 2 in these situations on the Pentium. Intel was wrong: while the first 11 bits were always correct, errors would show up occasionally in bits 12 to 52, or the 4th to 15th decimal digits. A math professor at Lynchburg College in Virginia, Thomas Nicely, discovered the bug in September 1994. After calling Intel technical support and getting no official reaction, he posted his discovery on the Internet. This post led to a story in a trade magazine, which in turn caused Intel to issue a press release. It called the bug a glitch that would affect only theoretical mathematicians, with the average spreadsheet user seeing an error every 27,000 years. IBM Research soon counterclaimed that the average spreadsheet user would see an error every 24 days. Intel soon threw in the towel by making the following announcement on December 21: We at Intel wish to sincerely apologize for our handling of the recently publicized Pentium processor flaw. The Intel Inside symbol means that your computer has a microprocessor second to none in quality and performance. Thousands of Intel employees work very hard to ensure that this is true. But no microprocessor is ever FIGURE 3.21  A sampling of newspaper and magazine articles from November 1994, including the New York Times, San Jose Mercury News, San Francisco Chronicle, and Infoworld. The Pentium floating-point divide bug even made the opening comedic monologue of the David Letterman Late Show on television. (“You know what goes great with those defective Pentium chips? Defective Pentium salsa!”) Intel eventually took a $500 million write-off to replace the buggy chips.

 3.10  Concluding Remarks perfect. What Intel continues to believe is technically an extremely minor problem has taken on a life of its own. Although Intel firmly stands behind the quality of the current version of the Pentium processor, we recognize that many users have concerns. We want to resolve these concerns. Intel will exchange the current version of the Pentium processor for an updated version, in which this floating-point divide flaw is corrected, for any owner who requests it, free of charge anytime during the life of their computer. Analysts estimate that this recall cost Intel $500 million, and Intel engineers did not get a Christmas bonus that year. This story brings up a few points for everyone to ponder. How much cheaper would it have been to fix the bug in July 1994? What was the cost to repair the damage to Intel’s reputation? And what is the corporate responsibility in disclosing bugs in a product so widely used and relied upon as a microprocessor? 3.10 Concluding Remarks Over the decades, computer arithmetic has become largely standardized, greatly enhancing the portability of programs. Two’s complement binary integer arithmetic is found in every computer sold today, and if it includes floating-point support, it offers the IEEE 754 binary floating-point arithmetic. Computer arithmetic is distinguished from paper-and-pencil arithmetic by the constraints of limited precision. This limit may result in invalid operations through calculating numbers larger or smaller than the predefined limits. Such anomalies, called “overflow” or “underflow,” may result in exceptions or interrupts, emergency events similar to unplanned subroutine calls. Chapters 4 and 5 discuss exceptions in more detail. Floating-point arithmetic has the added challenge of being an approximation of real numbers, and care needs to be taken to ensure that the computer number selected is the representation closest to the actual number. The challenges of imprecision and limited representation of floating point are part of the inspiration for the field of numerical analysis. The switch to parallelism will shine the searchlight on numerical analysis again, as solutions that were long considered safe on sequential computers must be reconsidered when trying to find the fastest algorithm for parallel computers that still achieves a correct result. Data-level parallelism, specifically subword parallelism, offers a simple path to higher performance for programs that are intensive in arithmetic operations for either integer or floating-point data. We showed that we could speed up matrix multiply nearly eightfold by using instructions that could execute eight floating-point operations at a time. With the explanation of computer arithmetic in this chapter comes a description of much more of the RISC-V instruction set. Figure 3.22 ranks the popularity of the twenty most common RISC-V instructions the for SPEC CPU2006 integer and floating-point benchmarks. As you can see, a relatively small number of instructions dominate these rankings. This observation has significant implications for the design of the processor, as we will see in Chapter 4.

Chapter 3  Arithmetic for Computers RISC-V Instruction Name Frequency Cumulative Add immediate addi 14.36% 14.36% Load word lw 12.65% 27.01% Add registers add 7.57% 34.58% Load fl. pt. double fld 6.83% 41.41% Store word sw 5.81% 47.22% Branch if not equal bne 4.14% 51.36% Shift left immediate slli 3.65% 55.01% Fused mul-add double fmadd.d 3.49% 58.50% Branch if equal beq 3.27% 61.77% Add immediate word addiw 2.86% 64.63% Store fl. pt. double fsd 2.24% 66.87% Multiply fl. pt. double fmul.d 2.02% 68.89% FIGURE 3.22  The frequency of the RISC-V instructions for the SPEC CPU2006 benchmarks. The 17 most popular instructions, which collectively account for 76% of all instructions executed, are included in the table. Pseudoinstructions are converted into RISC-V before execution, and hence do not appear here, explaining in part the popularity of addi. No matter what the instruction set or its size—RISC-V, MIPS, ARM, x86— never forget that bit patterns have no inherent meaning. The same bit pattern may represent a signed integer, unsigned integer, floating-point number, string, instruction, and so on. In stored-program computers, it is the operation on the bit pattern that determines its meaning. 3.12 Historical Perspective and Further Reading This section surveys the history of the floating point going back to von Neumann, including the surprisingly controversial IEEE standards effort, plus the rationale for the 80-bit stack architecture for floating point in the x86. See the rest of Section 3.11 online. 3.12 Self-Study Data can be anything. In the Self-Study section at the end of Chapter 2, we saw the binary bit pattern 00000001010010110010100000100011two in hexadecimal and 3.11 Gresham’s Law (“Bad money drives out Good”) for computers would say, “The Fast drives out the Slow even if the Fast is wrong.” W. Kahan, 1992

 3.11  Historical Perspective and Further Reading 242.e1 3.11 Historical Perspective and Further Reading This section surveys the history of the floating point going back to von Neumann, including the surprisingly controversial IEEE standards effort, the rationale for the 80-bit stack architecture for floating point in the IA-32, and an update on the next round of the standard. At first it may be hard to imagine a subject of less excitement than the correctness of computer arithmetic or its accuracy, and harder still to understand why a subject so old and mathematical should be so contentious. Computer arithmetic is as old as computing itself, and some of the subject’s earliest notions, like the economical reuse of registers during serial multiplication and division, still command respect today. Maurice Wilkes [1985] recalled a conversation about that notion during his visit to the United States in 1946, before the earliest stored-program computer had been built: … a project under von Neumann was to be set up at the Institute of Advanced Studies in Princeton.… Goldstine explained to me the principal features of the design, including the device whereby the digits of the multiplier were put into the tail of the accumulator and shifted out as the least significant part of the product was shifted in. I expressed some admiration at the way registers and shifting circuits were arranged … and Goldstine remarked that things of that nature came very easily to von Neumann. There is no controversy here; it can hardly arise in the context of exact integer arithmetic, so long as there is general agreement on what integer the correct result should be. However, as soon as approximate arithmetic enters the picture, so does controversy, as if one person’s “negligible” must be another’s “everything.” The First Dispute Floating-point arithmetic kindled disagreement before it was ever built. John von Neumann was aware of Konrad Zuse’s proposal for a computer in Germany in 1939 that was never built, probably because the floating point made it appear too complicated to finish before the Germans expected World War II to end. Hence, von Neumann refused to include it in the computer he built at Princeton. In an influential report coauthored in 1946 with H. H. Goldstine and A. W. Burks, he gave the arguments for and against floating point. In favor: … to retain in a sum or product as many significant digits as possible and … to free the human operator from the burden of estimating and inserting into a problem “scale factors”—multiplication constants which serve to keep numbers within the limits of the machine. Gresham’s Law (“Bad money drives out Good”) for computers would say, “The Fast drives out the Slow even if the Fast is wrong.” W. Kahan, 1992

242.e2 3.11  Historical Perspective and Further Reading Floating point was excluded for several reasons: There is, of course, no denying the fact that human time is consumed in arranging for the introduction of suitable scale factors. We only argue that the time consumed is a very small percentage of the total time we will spend in preparing an interesting problem for our machine. The first advantage of the floating point is, we feel, somewhat illusory. In order to have such a floating point, one must waste memory capacity which could otherwise be used for carrying more digits per word. It would therefore seem to us not at all clear whether the modest advantages of a floating binary point offset the loss of memory capacity and the increased complexity of the arithmetic and control circuits. The argument seems to be that most bits devoted to exponent fields would be bits wasted. Experience has proven otherwise. One software approach to accommodate reals without floating-point hardware was called floating vectors; the idea was to compute at runtime one-scale factor for a whole array of numbers, choosing the scale factor so that the array’s biggest number would barely fill its field. By 1951, James H. Wilkinson had used this scheme extensively for matrix computations. The problem proved to be that a program might encounter a very large value, and hence the scale factor must accommodate these rare sizeable numbers. The common numbers would thus have many leading 0s, since all numbers had to use a single-scale factor. Accuracy was sacrificed, because the least significant bits had to be lost on the right to accommodate leading 0s. This wastage became obvious to practitioners on early computers that displayed all their memory bits as dots on cathode ray tubes (like TV screens) because the loss of precision was visible. Where floating point deserved to be used, no practical alternative existed. Thus, true floating-point hardware became popular because it was useful. By 1957, floating-point hardware was almost ubiquitous. A decimal floating-point unit was available for the IBM 650, and soon the IBM 704, 709, 7090, 7094 … series would offer binary floating-point hardware for double, as well as single, precision. As a result, everybody had floating point, but every implementation was different. Diversity versus Portability Since roundoff introduces some error into almost all floating-point operations, to complain about another bit of error seems picayune. So for 20 years, nobody complained much that those operations behaved a little differently on different computers. If software required clever tricks to circumvent those idiosyncrasies and finally deliver results correct in all but the last several bits, such tricks were deemed part of the programmer’s art. For a long time, matrix computations mystified most people who had no notion of error analysis; perhaps this continues to be true. That 

 3.11  Historical Perspective and Further Reading 242.e3 may be why people are still surprised that numerically stable matrix computations depend upon the quality of arithmetic in so few places, far fewer than are generally supposed. Books by Wilkinson and widely used software packages like Linpack and Eispack sustained a false impression, widespread in the early 1970s, that a modicum of skill sufficed to produce portable numerical software. “Portable” here means that the software is distributed as source code in some standard language to be compiled and executed on practically any commercially significant computer, and that it will then perform its task as well as any other program performs that task on that computer. Insofar as numerical software has often been thought to consist entirely of computer-independent mathematical formulas, its portability has commonly been taken for granted; the mistake in that presumption will become clear shortly. Packages like Linpack and Eispack cost so much to develop—over a hundred dollars per line of Fortran delivered—that they could not have been developed without U.S. government subsidy; their portability was a precondition for that subsidy. But nobody thought to distinguish how various components contributed to their cost. One component was algorithmic—devise an algorithm that deserves to work on at least one computer despite its roundoff and over-/underflow limitations. Another component was the software engineering effort required to achieve and confirm portability to the diverse computers commercially significant at the time; this component grew more onerous as ever more diverse floating-point arithmetics blossomed in the 1970s. And yet scarcely anybody realized how much that diversity inflated the cost of such software packages. A Backward Step Early evidence that somewhat different arithmetics could engender grossly different software development costs was presented in 1964. It happened at a meeting of SHARE, the IBM mainframe users’ group, at which IBM announced System/360, the successor to the 7094 series. One of the speakers described the tricks he had been forced to devise to achieve a level of quality for the S/360 library that was not quite so high as he had previously achieved for the 7094. Von Neumann could have foretold part of the trouble, had he still been alive. In 1948, he and Goldstine had published a lengthy error analysis so difficult and so pessimistic that hardly anybody paid attention to it. It did predict correctly, however, that computations with larger arrays of data would probably fall prey to roundoff more often. IBM S/360s had bigger memories than 7094s, so data arrays could grow larger, and they did. To make matters worse, the S/360s had narrower single-precision words (32 bits versus 36) and used a cruder arithmetic (hexadecimal or base 16 versus binary or base 2) with consequently poorer worst- case precision (21 significant bits versus 27) than the old 7094s. Consequently, 

242.e4 3.11  Historical Perspective and Further Reading software that had almost always provided (barely) satisfactory accuracy on 7094s too often produced inaccurate results when run on S/360s. The quickest way to recover adequate accuracy was to replace old codes’ single precision declarations with double precision before recompilation for the S/360. This practice exercised S/360 double precision far more than had been expected. The early S/360’s worst troubles were caused by lack of a guard digit in double precision. This lack showed up in multiplication as a failure of identities like 1.0* x = x because multiplying x by 1.0 dropped x’s last hexadecimal digit (4 bits). Similarly, if x and y were very close but had different exponents, subtraction dropped off the last digit of the smaller operand before computing x − y. This final aberration in double precision undermined a precious theorem that single precision then (and now) honored: If 1/2 ≤x/y ≤2, then no rounding error can occur when x − y is computed; it must be computed exactly. Innumerable computations had benefited from this minor theorem, most often unwittingly, for several decades before its first formal announcement and proof. We had been taking all this stuff for granted. The identities and theorems about exact relationships that persisted, despite roundoff, with reasonable implementations of approximate arithmetic were not appreciated until they were lost. Previously, it had been thought that the things to matter were precision (how many significant digits were carried) and range (the spread between over-/underflow thresholds). Since the S/360’s double precision had more precision and wider range than the 7094’s, software was expected to continue to work at least as well as before. But it didn’t. Programmers who had matured into program managers were appalled at the cost of converting 7094 software to run on S/360s. A small subcommittee of SHARE proposed improvements to the S/360 floating point. This committee was surprised and grateful to get a fair part of what they asked for from IBM, including all-important guard digits. By 1968, these had been retrofitted to S/360s in the field at considerable expense; worse than that was customers’ loss of faith in IBM’s infallibility (a lesson learned by Intel 30 years later; see Figure 3.25). IBM employees who can remember the incident still shudder. The People Who Built the Bombs Seymour Cray was associated for decades with the CDC and Cray computers that were, when he built them, the world’s biggest and fastest. He always understood what his customers wanted most: speed. And he gave it to them even if, in so doing, he also gave them arithmetics more “interesting” than anyone else’s. Among his customers have been the great government laboratories like those at Livermore and Los Alamos, where nuclear weapons were designed. The challenges of “interesting” arithmetics were pretty tame to people who had to overcome Mother Nature’s challenges.

 3.11  Historical Perspective and Further Reading 242.e5 Perhaps all of us could learn to live with arithmetic idiosyncrasy if only one computer’s idiosyncrasies had to be endured. Instead, when accumulating different computers’ different anomalies, software dies the Death of a Thousand Cuts. Here is an example from Cray’s computers: if (x == 0.0)    y = 17.0 else y = z/x Could this statement be stopped by a divide-by-zero error? On a CDC 6600 it could. The reason was a conflict between the 6600’s adder, where x was compared with 0.0, and the multiplier and divider. The adder’s comparison examined x’s leading 13 bits, which sufficed to distinguish zero from normal nonzero floating- point numbers x. The multiplier and divider examined only 12 leading bits. Consequently, tiny numbers existed that were nonzero to the adder but zero to the multiplier and divider! To avoid disasters with these tiny numbers, programmers learned to replace statements like the one above with if (1.0 * x == 0.0)    y = 17.0 else y = z/x But this statement is unsafe to use in would-be portable software because it malfunctions obscurely on other computers designed by Cray, the ones marketed by Cray Research, Inc. If x was so huge that 2.0 * x would overflow, then 1.0 * x might overflow too! Overflow happens because Cray computers check the product’s exponent before the product’s exponent has been normalized, just to save the delay of a single AND gate. Rounding error anomalies that are far worse than the over-/underflow anomaly just discussed also affect Cray computers. The worst error came from the lack of a guard digit in add/subtract, an affliction of IBM S/360s. Further bad luck for software is occasioned by the way Cray economized his multiplier; about one- third of the bits that normal multiplier arrays generate have been left out of his multipliers, because they would contribute less than a unit to the last place of the final Cray-rounded product. Consequently, a Cray multiplier errs by almost a bit more than might have been expected. This error is compounded when division takes three multiplications to improve an approximate reciprocal of the divisor and then multiply the numerator by it. Square root compounds a few more multiplication errors. The fast way drove out the slow, even though the fast was occasionally slightly wrong. Making the World Safe for Floating Point, or Vice Versa William Kahan was an undergraduate at the University of Toronto in 1953 when he learned to program its Ferranti-Manchester Mark-I computer. Because he entered the field early, Kahan became acquainted with a wide range of devices and a large proportion of the personalities active in computing; the numbers of both were small at that time. He has performed computations on slide rules, desktop 

242.e6 3.11  Historical Perspective and Further Reading mechanical calculators, tabletop analog differential analyzers, and so on; he has used all but the earliest electronic computers and calculators mentioned in this book. Kahan’s desire to deliver reliable software led to an interest in error analysis that intensified during two years of postdoctoral study in England, where he became acquainted with Wilkinson. In 1960, he resumed teaching at Toronto, where an IBM 7090 had been acquired, and was granted free rein to tinker with its operating system, Fortran compiler, and runtime library. (He denies that he ever came near the 7090 hardware with a soldering iron but admits asking to do so.) One story from that time illuminates how misconceptions and numerical anomalies in computer systems can incur awesome hidden costs. A graduate student in aeronautical engineering used the 7090 to simulate the wings he was designing for short takeoffs and landings. He knew such a wing would be difficult to control if its characteristics included an abrupt onset of stall, but he thought he could avoid that. His simulations were telling him otherwise. Just to be sure that roundoff was not interfering, he had repeated many of his calculations in double precision and gotten results much like those in single; his wings had stalled abruptly in both precisions. Disheartened, the student gave up. Meanwhile Kahan replaced IBM’s logarithm program (ALOG) with one of his own, which he hoped would provide better accuracy. While testing it, Kahan reran programs using the new version of ALOG. The student’s results changed significantly; Kahan approached him to find out what had happened. The student was puzzled. Much as the student preferred the results produced with the new ALOG—they predicted a gradual stall—he knew they must be wrong because they disagreed with his double precision results. The discrepancy between single and double precision results disappeared a few days later when a new release of IBM’s double-precision arithmetic software for the 7090 arrived. (The 7090 had no double-precision hardware.) He went on to write a thesis about it and to build the wings; they performed as predicted. But that is not the end of the story. In 1963, the 7090 was replaced by a faster 7094 with double precision floating- point hardware but with otherwise practically the same instruction set as the 7090. Only in double precision and only when using the new hardware did the wing stall abruptly again. A lot of time was spent to find out why. The 7094 hardware turned out, like the superseded 7090 software and the subsequent early S/360s, to lack a guard bit in double precision. Like so many programmers on those computers and on Cray’s, the student discovered a trick to compensate for the lack of a guard digit; he wrote the expression (0.5 — x) + 0.5 in place of 1.0 — x. Nowadays we would blush if we had to explain why such a trick might be necessary, but it solved the student’s problem. Meanwhile the lure of California was working on Kahan and his family; they came to Berkeley and he to the University of California. An opportunity presented itself in 1974 when accuracy questions induced Hewlett-Packard’s calculator designers to call in a consultant. The consultant was Kahan, and his work 

 3.11  Historical Perspective and Further Reading 242.e7 dramatically improved the accuracy of HP calculators, but that is another story. Fruitful collaboration with congenial coworkers, however, fortified him for the next and crucial opportunity. It came in 1976, when John F. Palmer at Intel was empowered to specify the “best possible” floating-point arithmetic for all of Intel’s product line, as Moore’s Law made it now possible to create a whole floating-point unit on a single chip. The floating-point standard was originally started for the iAPX-432, but when it was late, Intel started the 8086 as a short-term emergency stand-in until the iAPX-432 was ready. The iAPX-432 never became popular, so the emergency stand-in became the standard-bearer for Intel. The 8087 floating-point coprocessor for the 8086 was contemplated. (A coprocessor is simply an additional chip that accelerates a portion of the work of a processor; in this case, it accelerated floating-point computation.) Palmer had obtained his Ph.D. at Stanford a few years before and knew whom to call for counsel of perfection—Kahan. They put together a design that obviously would have been impossible only a few years earlier and looked not quite possible at the time. But a new Israeli team of Intel employees led by Rafi Navé felt challenged to prove their prowess to Americans and leaped at an opportunity to put something impossible on a chip—the 8087. By now, floating-point arithmetics that had been merely diverse among mainframes had become chaotic among microprocessors, one of which might be host to a dozen varieties of arithmetic in ROM firmware or software. Robert G. Stewart, an engineer prominent in IEEE activities, got fed up with this anarchy and proposed that the IEEE draft a decent floating-point standard. Simultaneously, word leaked out in Silicon Valley that Intel was going to put on one chip some awesome floating point well beyond anything its competitors had in mind. The competition had to find a way to slow Intel down, so they formed a committee to do what Stewart requested. Meetings of this committee began in late 1977 with a plethora of competing drafts from innumerable sources and dragged on into 1985, when IEEE Standard 754 for Binary Floating Point was made official. The winning draft was very close to one submitted by Kahan, his student Jerome T. Coonen, and Harold S. Stone, a professor visiting Berkeley at the time. Their draft was based on the Intel design, with Intel’s permission, of course, as simplified by Coonen. Their harmonious combination of features, almost none of them new, had at the outset attracted more support within the committee and from outside experts like Wilkinson than any other draft, but they had to win nearly unanimous support within the committee to win official IEEE endorsement, and that took time. The First IEEE 754 Chips In 1980, Intel became tired of waiting and released the 8087 for use in the IBM PC. The floating-point architecture of the companion 8087 had to be retrofitted into the 8086 opcode space, making it inconvenient to offer two operands per 

242.e8 3.11  Historical Perspective and Further Reading instruction as found in the rest of the 8086. Hence the decision for one operand per instruction using a stack: “The designer’s task was to make a Virtue of this Necessity.” (Kahan’s [1990] history of the stack architecture selection for the 8087 is entertaining reading.) Rather than the classical stack architecture, which has no provision for avoiding common subexpressions from being pushed and popped from memory into the top of the stack found in registers, Intel tried to combine a flat register file with a stack. The reasoning was that the restriction of the top of stack as one operand was not so bad since it only required the execution of an FXCH instruction (which swapped registers) to get the same result as a two-operand instruction, and FXCH was much faster than the floating-point operations of the 8087. Since floating-point expressions are not that complex, Kahan reasoned that eight registers meant that the stack would rarely overflow. Hence, he urged that the 8087 use this hybrid scheme with the provision that stack overflow or stack underflow would interrupt the 8086 so that interrupt software could give the illusion to the compiler writer of an unlimited stack for floating-point data. The Intel 8087 was implemented in Israel, and 7500 miles and 10 time zones made communication from California difficult. According to Palmer and Morse (The 8087 Primer, J. Wiley, New York, 1984, p. 93): Unfortunately, nobody tried to write a software stack manager until after the 8087 was built, and by then it was too late; what was too complicated to perform in hardware turned out to be even worse in software. One thing found lacking is the ability to conveniently determine if an invalid operation is indeed due to a stack overflow.… Also lacking is the ability to restart the instruction that caused the stack overflow … The result is that the stack exceptions are too slow to handle in software. As Kahan [1990] says: Consequently, almost all higher-level languages’ compilers emit inefficient code for the 80x87 family, degrading the chip’s performance by typically 50% with spurious stores and loads necessary simply to preclude stack over/under-flow.… I still regret that the 8087’s stack implementation was not quite so neat as my original intention.… If the original design had been realized, compilers today would use the 80x87 and its descendents more efficiently, and Intel’s competitors could more easily market faster but compatible 80x87 imitations. In 1982, Motorola announced its 68881, which found a place in Sun 3s and Macintosh IIs; Apple had been a supporter of the proposal from the beginning. Another Berkeley graduate student, George S. Taylor, had soon designed a high- speed implementation of the proposed standard for an early superminicomputer (ELXSI 6400). The standard was becoming de facto before its final draft’s ink was dry.

 3.11  Historical Perspective and Further Reading 242.e9 An early rush of adoptions gave the computing industry the false impression that IEEE 754, like so many other standards, could be implemented easily by following a standard recipe. Not true. Only the enthusiasm and ingenuity of its early implementors made it look easy. In fact, to implement IEEE 754 correctly demands extraordinarily diligent attention to detail; to make it run fast demands extraordinarily competent ingenuity of design. Had the industry’s engineering managers realized this, they might not have been so quick to affirm that, as a matter of policy, “We conform to all applicable standards.” IEEE 754 Today Unfortunately, the compiler-writing community was not represented adequately in the wrangling, and some of the features didn’t balance language and compiler issues against other points. That community has been slow to make IEEE 754’s unusual features available to the applications programmer. Humane exception handling is one such unusual feature; directed rounding another. Without compiler support, these features have atrophied. The successful parts of IEEE 754 are that it is a widely implemented standard with a common floating-point format, that it requires minimum accuracy to one- half ulp in the least significant bit, and that operations must be commutative. The IEEE 754/854 has been implemented to a considerable degree of fidelity in at least part of the product line of every North American computer manufacturer. The only significant exceptions were the DEC VAX, IBM S/370 descendants, and Cray Research vector supercomputers, and all three have been replaced by compliant computers. IEEE rules ask that a standard be revisited periodically for updating. A committee started in 2000, and drafts of the revised standards were circulated for voting, and these were approved in 2008. The revised standard, IEEE Std 754-2008 [2008], includes several new types: 16-bit floating point, called half precision; 128- bit floating point, called quad precision; and three decimal types, matching the length of the 32-bit, 64-bit, and 128-bit binary formats. IEEE Std 754-2019 made minor changes to the standard. The plan is to revisit it every 10 years. In 1989, the Association for Computing Machinery, acknowledging the benefits conferred upon the computing industry by IEEE 754, honored Kahan with the Turing Award. On accepting it, he thanked his many associates for their diligent support, and his adversaries for their blunders. So . . . not all errors are bad.

242.e10 3.11  Historical Perspective and Further Reading Further Reading If you are interested in learning more about floating point, two publications by David Goldberg [1991, 2002] are good starting points; they abound with pointers to further reading. Several of the stories told in this section come from Kahan [1972, 1983]. The latest word on the state of the art in computer arithmetic is often found in the Proceedings of the most recent IEEE-sponsored Symposium on Computer Arithmetic, held every two years; the 27th was held in 2020. Burks, A. W., H. H. Goldstine, and J. von Neumann [1946]. “Preliminary discussion of the logical design of an electronic computing instrument,” Report to the U.S. Army Ordnance Dept., p. 1; also in Papers of John von Neumann, W. Aspray and A. Burks (Eds.), MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, and Tomash Publishers, Los Angeles, 1987, 97–146. This classic paper includes arguments against floating-point hardware. Goldberg, D. [2002]. “Computer arithmetic”. Appendix A of Computer Architecture: A Quantitative Approach, third edition, J. L. Hennessy and D. A. Patterson, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, San Francisco. A more advanced introduction to integer and floating-point arithmetic, with emphasis on hardware. It covers Sections 3.4–3.6 of this book in just 10 pages, leaving another 45 pages for advanced topics. Goldberg, D. [1991]. “What every computer scientist should know about floating-point arithmetic”, ACM Computing Surveys 23(1), 5–48. Another good introduction to floating-point arithmetic by the same author, this time with emphasis on software. Kahan, W. [1972]. “A survey of error-analysis,” in Info. Processing 71 (Proc. IFIP Congress 71 in Ljubljana), Vol. 2, North-Holland Publishing, Amsterdam, 1214–1239. This survey is a source of stories on the importance of accurate arithmetic. Kahan, W. [1983]. “Mathematics written in sand,” Proc. Amer. Stat. Assoc. Joint Summer Meetings of 1983, Statistical Computing Section, 12–26. The title refers to silicon and is another source of stories illustrating the importance of accurate arithmetic. Kahan, W. [1990]. “On the advantage of the 8087’s stack,” unpublished course notes, Computer Science Division, University of California, Berkeley. What the 8087 floating-point architecture could have been. Kahan, W. [1997]. Available at http://www.cims.nyu.edu/~dbindel/class/cs279/87stack.pdf. A collection of memos related to floating point, including “Beastly numbers” (another less famous Pentium bug), “Notes on the IEEE floating point arithmetic” (including comments on how some features are atrophying), and “The baleful effects of computing benchmarks” (on the unhealthy preoccupation on speed versus correctness, accuracy, ease of use, flexibility, …). Koren, I. [2002]. Computer Arithmetic Algorithms, second edition, A. K. Peters, Natick, MA. A textbook aimed at seniors and first-year graduate students that explains fundamental principles of basic arithmetic, as well as complex operations such as logarithmic and trigonometric functions. Wilkes, M. V. [1985]. Memoirs of a Computer Pioneer, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. This computer pioneer’s recollections include the derivation of the standard hardware for multiply and divide developed by von Neumann.

 3.12  Self-Study decimal, and as a MIPS assembly language instruction. What IEEE 754 floating point number does it represent? Big numbers. What is the largest, positive 2’s complement 32-bit integer? Can you represent it exactly in IEEE 754 single-precision floating point? If not, how close can you get? What about IEEE 754 half-precision floating point? Brainy Arithmetic. Machine learning is starting to work so well that it is revolutionizing many industries (see Section 6.6.5 of Chapter 6). It uses floating point numbers to learn, but unlike scientific programming, it does not need lots of precision. Double-precision floating point, the standard bearer of scientific programming, is overkill, as 32 bits is sufficient. Ideally it could use half-precision (16 bits), since that is much more efficient in computation and memory. However, machine-learning training often deals with very small numbers, so the range is important. These observations about the needs of machine learning led to a new format that is not part of the IEEE standard, called Brain float 16 (named after Google’s Brain division, which invented the format). Figure 3.23 shows the three formats. Assume Brain float 16 follows the same conventions as IEEE 754, just with different field sizes. What is the smallest nonzero positive number that you can represent in the three formats? How much smaller is that number for Brain float 16 than for IEEE fp32? Than for fp16? (If you know about subnormals or denorms, ignore them for this question.) Brainy Area and Energy. A common operation in machine learning is multiply and accumulate like we see in DGEMM, with the multiply occupying most of the silicon area and using most of the energy. If we have fast multipliers as in Figure 3.7, they are primarily a function of the square of size of the inputs. What are the correct ratios of area/energy of the three formats for multiplies? 1. 322 vs. 162 vs. 162 for fp32, fp16, and Brain float, respectively 2. 82 vs. 52 vs. 82 3. 232 vs. 102 vs. 72 4. 242 vs. 112 vs. 82 Brainy Programming. Can you think of software benefits of IEEE fp32 and Brain float 16 having the same-sized exponents? Brainy Choices. For the domain for machine learning, which of the following are true about Brain float 16 arithmetic versus IEEE 754 half-precision floating point? 1. Brain float 16 multipliers take much less hardware than IEEE 754 half precision. 2. Brain float 16 multiplies take much less energy than IEEE 754 half precision. 3. Brain float 16 is easier for software than IEEE 754 half precision when converting from IEEE 754 full-precision software. 4. All of the above.

Chapter 3  Arithmetic for Computers FIGURE 3.23  Floating point format for IEEE 754 single-precision (fp32), IEEE 754 half-precision (fp16), and Brain float 16. Google’s TPUv3 hardware uses Brain float 16 (see Section 6.11). Remaining MIPS-32 Name Format Pseudo MIPS Name Format exclusive or (rs ⊕ rt) xor R absolute value abs rd,rs exclusive or immediate xori I negate (signed or unsigned) negs rd,rs shift right arithmetic sra R rotate left rol rd,rs,rt shift left logical variable sllv R rotate right ror rd,rs,rt shift right logical variable srlv R multiply and don’t check oﬂw (signed or uns.) muls rd,rs,rt shift right arithmetic variable srav R multiply and check oﬂw (signed or uns.) mulos rd,rs,rt move to Hi mthi R divide and check overﬂow div rd,rs,rt move to Lo mtlo R divide and don’t check overﬂow divu rd,rs,rt load halfword lh I remainder (signed or unsigned) rems rd,rs,rt load byte lb I load immediate li rd,imm load word left (unaligned) lwl I load address la rd,addr load word right (unaligned) lwr I load double ld rd,addr store word left (unaligned) swl I store double sd rd,addr store word right (unaligned) swr I unaligned load word ulw rd,addr load linked (atomic update) ll I unaligned store word usw rd,addr store cond. (atomic update) sc I unaligned load halfword (signed or uns.) ulhs rd,addr move if zero movz R unaligned store halfword ush rd,addr move if not zero movn R branch b Label multiply and add (S or uns.) madds R branch on equal zero beqz rs,L multiply and subtract (S or uns.) msubs I branch on compare (signed or unsigned) bxs rs,rt,L branch on ≥ zero and link bgezal I (x = lt, le, gt, ge) branch on < zero and link bltzal I set equal seq rd,rs,rt jump and link register jalr R set not equal sne rd,rs,rt branch compare to zero bxz I set on compare (signed or unsigned) sxs rd,rs,rt branch compare to zero likely bxzl I (x = lt, le, gt, ge) (x = lt, le, gt, ge) load to ﬂoating point (s or d) l.f rd,addr branch compare reg likely bxl I store from ﬂoating point (s or d) s.f rd,addr trap if compare reg tx R trap if compare immediate txi I (x = eq, neq, lt, le, gt, ge) return from exception rfe R system call syscall I break (cause exception) break I move from FP to integer mfc1 R move to FP from integer mtc1 R FP move (s or d) mov.f R FP move if zero (s or d) movz.f R FP move if not zero (s or d) movn.f R FP square root (s or d) sqrt.f R FP absolute value (s or d) abs.f R FP negate (s or d) neg.f R FP convert (w, s, or d) cvt.f.f R FP compare un (s or d) c.xn.f R

 3.12  Self-Study Self-Study Answers Data can be anything. Mapping the binary number into the IEEE 754 floating- point format: Sign (1) Exponent (8) Fraction (23) 00000010two 10010110010100000100011two + 2ten 4,925,475ten Since the exponent bias for single precision floating point is 127, the exponent is actually 2-127 or -125. The fraction can be thought of as 4,925,475ten /(223-1) = 4,925,475ten /8,388,607ten = 0.58716244544ten. The actual significand adds the implicit 1, so the real number the binary pattern represents is 1.58716244544ten x 2-125 or about 3.731401ten x 10-38. Once again, this exercise demonstrates that there is no inherent meaning in a bit pattern; it depends solely on how software interprets it. Big numbers. The largest, positive 2’s complement 32-bit integer is 231 – 1 = 2,147,483,647. You cannot represent it exactly in IEEE 754 single-precision floating point. Sign (1) Exponent (8) Fraction (23) 00000010two 00000000000000000000000two + 158ten 0ten =1.0 ∗2(158-127) =1.0 ∗231= 2,147,483,648, so off by 1 from 231 – 1. The largest number you can represent in IEEE 754 half precision is Sign (1) Exponent (5) Fraction (10) 11110two 1111111111two + 30ten 1023ten = (1 + 1023/1024) ∗2(30-15) = 1.999 ∗ 215 = 65,504, so it is off by many orders of magnitude. Converting integers to IEEE half-precision float can cause overflow. (The 5-bit exponent 11111two is reserved for infinites and NaNs in half precision, like the exponent 11111111two is reserved for single precision.) Brainy Arithmetic. Smallest nonzero positive numbers per format: IEEE fp32 1.0 ∗ 2-126 IEEE fp16 1.0 ∗ 2-14. Brain float16 1.0 ∗ 2-126 Since IEEE fp32 and Brian float 16 have the same-sized exponents, they can represent the same smallest nonzero positive number. The smallest number they can represent is 2112 times smaller than that of IEEE fp16, or about 5 x1033. Brainy Area and Energy The exponent and sign fields are not involved in the multiplications, so the answer is a function of the size of significands. As there is an implicit 1 followed by the fraction in these formats, the correct answer is number 4: 242 vs. 112 vs. 82. That 

Chapter 3  Arithmetic for Computers makes the IEEE fp16 multiplier about twice (121/64) the size or energy of Brain float 16 and IEEE fp32 about nine (576/64) times larger. Brainy Programming. Since the exponents are the same, that means software will have the same behavior for underflows and overflows, Not a Numbers (NaNs), infinities, and so on, which means software using brain float 16 to replace IEEE fp32 in some calculations will likely have fewer compatibility problems than switching to IEEE fp16. Brainy Choices. The answer is 4, all of the above. Remarkably, for machine learning applications, Brain float 16 is easier for both hardware designers and software programmers. Not surprisingly, Brain float 16 is very popular for machine learning, and Googles TPUv2 and TPUv3 were the first processors to implement it (See Section 6.11) 3.13 Exercises 3.1  [5] <§3.2> What is 5ED4 − 07A4 when these values represent unsigned 16-bit hexadecimal numbers? The result should be written in hexadecimal. Show your work. 3.2  [5] <§3.2> What is 5ED4 − 07A4 when these values represent signed 16- bit hexadecimal numbers stored in sign-magnitude format? The result should be written in hexadecimal. Show your work. 3.3  [10] <§3.2> Convert 5ED4 into a binary number. What makes base 16 (hexadecimal) an attractive numbering system for representing values in computers? 3.4  [5] <§3.2> What is 4365 − 3412 when these values represent unsigned 12-bit octal numbers? The result should be written in octal. Show your work. 3.5  [5] <§3.2> What is 4365 − 3412 when these values represent signed 12-bit octal numbers stored in sign-magnitude format? The result should be written in octal. Show your work. 3.6  [5] <§3.2> Assume 185 and 122 are unsigned 8-bit decimal integers. Calculate 185–122. Is there overflow, underflow, or neither? 3.7  [5] <§3.2> Assume 185 and 122 are signed 8-bit decimal integers stored in sign- magnitude format. Calculate 185 + 122. Is there overflow, underflow, or neither? 3.8  [5] <§3.2> Assume 185 and 122 are signed 8-bit decimal integers stored in sign- magnitude format. Calculate 185 − 122. Is there overflow, underflow, or neither? 3.9  [10] <§3.2> Assume 151 and 214 are signed 8-bit decimal integers stored in two’s complement format. Calculate 151 + 214 using saturating arithmetic. The result should be written in decimal. Show your work. 3.10  [10] <§3.2> Assume 151 and 214 are signed 8-bit decimal integers stored in two’s complement format. Calculate 151 − 214 using saturating arithmetic. The result should be written in decimal. Show your work. Never give in, never give in, never, never, never—in nothing, great or small, large or petty—never give in. Winston Churchill, address at Harrow School, 1941

 3.13  Exercises 3.11  [10] <§3.2> Assume 151 and 214 are unsigned 8-bit integers. Calculate 151+ 214 using saturating arithmetic. The result should be written in decimal. Show your work. 3.12  [20] <§3.3> Using a table similar to that shown in Figure 3.6, calculate the product of the octal unsigned 6-bit integers 62 and 12 using the hardware described in Figure 3.3. You should show the contents of each register on each step. 3.13  [20] <§3.3> Using a table similar to that shown in Figure 3.6, calculate the product of the octal unsigned 8-bit integers 62 and 12 using the hardware described in Figure 3.5. You should show the contents of each register on each step. 3.14  [10] <§3.3> Calculate the time necessary to perform a multiply using the approach given in Figures 3.3 and 3.4 if an integer is 8 bits wide and each step of the operation takes four time units. Assume that in step 1a an addition is always performed—either the multiplicand will be added, or a zero will be. Also assume that the registers have already been initialized (you are just counting how long it takes to do the multiplication loop itself). If this is being done in hardware, the shifts of the multiplicand and multiplier can be done simultaneously. If this is being done in software, they will have to be done one after the other. Solve for each case. 3.15  [10] <§3.3> Calculate the time necessary to perform a multiply using the approach described in the text (31 adders stacked vertically) if an integer is 8 bits wide and an adder takes four time units. 3.16  [20] <§3.3> Calculate the time necessary to perform a multiply using the approach given in Figure 3.7 if an integer is 8 bits wide and an adder takes four time units. 3.17  [20] <§3.3> As discussed in the text, one possible performance enhancement is to do a shift and add instead of an actual multiplication. Since 9 × 6, for example, can be written (2 × 2 × 2 + 1) × 6, we can calculate 9 × 6 by shifting 6 to the left three times and then adding 6 to that result. Show the best way to calculate 0 × 33 × 0 × 55 using shifts and adds/subtracts. Assume both inputs are 8-bit unsigned integers. 3.18  [20] <§3.4> Using a table similar to that shown in Figure 3.10, calculate 74 divided by 21 using the hardware described in Figure 3.8. You should show the contents of each register on each step. Assume both inputs are unsigned 6-bit integers. 3.19  [30] <§3.4> Using a table similar to that shown in Figure 3.10, calculate 74 divided by 21 using the hardware described in Figure 3.11. You should show the contents of each register on each step. Assume A and B are unsigned 6-bit integers. This algorithm requires a slightly different approach than that shown in Figure 3.9. You will want to think hard about this, do an experiment or two, or else go to the web to figure out how to make this work correctly. (Hint: one possible solution involves using the fact that Figure 3.11 implies the remainder register can be shifted either direction.) 3.20  [5] <§3.5> What decimal number does the bit pattern 0 × 0C000000 represent if it is a two’s complement integer? An unsigned integer? 3.21  [10] <§3.5> If the bit pattern 0 × 0000006F is placed into the Instruction Register, what RISC-V instruction will be executed?

Chapter 3  Arithmetic for Computers 3.22  [10] <§3.5> What decimal number does the bit pattern 0 × 0C000000 represent if it is a floating point number? Use the IEEE 754 standard. 3.23  [10] <§3.5> Write down the binary representation of the decimal number 63.25 assuming the IEEE 754 single precision format. 3.24  [10] <§3.5> Write down the binary representation of the decimal number 63.25 assuming the IEEE 754 double precision format. 3.25  [10] <§3.5> Write down the binary representation of the decimal number 63.25 assuming it was stored using the single precision IBM format (base 16, instead of base 2, with 7 bits of exponent). 3.26  [20] <§3.5> Write down the binary bit pattern to represent −1.5625 × 10−1 assuming a format similar to that employed by the DEC PDP-8 (the leftmost 12 bits are the exponent stored as a two’s complement number, and the rightmost 24 bits are the fraction stored as a two’s complement number). No hidden 1 is used. Comment on how the range and accuracy of this 36-bit pattern compares to the single and double precision IEEE 754 standards. 3.27  [20] <§3.5> IEEE 754-2008 contains a half precision that is only 16 bits wide. The leftmost bit is still the sign bit, the exponent is 5 bits wide and has a bias of 15, and the mantissa is 10 bits long. A hidden 1 is assumed. Write down the bit pattern to represent −1.5625 × 10−1 assuming a version of this format, which uses an excess-16 format to store the exponent. Comment on how the range and accuracy of this 16-bit floating point format compares to the single precision IEEE 754 standard. 3.28  [20] <§3.5> The Hewlett-Packard 2114, 2115, and 2116 used a format with the leftmost 16 bits being the fraction stored in two’s complement format, followed by another 16-bit field which had the leftmost 8 bits as an extension of the fraction (making the fraction 24 bits long), and the rightmost 8 bits representing the exponent. However, in an interesting twist, the exponent was stored in sign-magnitude format with the sign bit on the far right! Write down the bit pattern to represent −1.5625 × 10−1 assuming this format. No hidden 1 is used. Comment on how the range and accuracy of this 32-bit pattern compares to the single precision IEEE 754 standard. 3.29  [20] <§3.5> Calculate the sum of 2.6125 × 101 and 4.150390625 × 10−1 by hand, assuming A and B are stored in the 16-bit half precision described in Exercise 3.27. Assume 1 guard, 1 round bit, and 1 sticky bit, and round to the nearest even. Show all the steps. 3.30  [30] <§3.5> Calculate the product of –8.0546875 × 100 and −1.79931640625 × 10–1 by hand, assuming A and B are stored in the 16-bit half-precision format described in Exercise 3.27. Assume 1 guard, 1 round bit, and 1 sticky bit, and round to the nearest even. Show all the steps; however, as is done in the example in the text, you can do the multiplication in human-readable format instead of using the techniques described in Exercises 3.12 through 3.14. Indicate if there is overflow or underflow. Write your answer in both the 16-bit floating-point format described in Exercise 3.27 and also as a decimal number. How accurate is your result? How does it compare to the number you get if you do the multiplication on a calculator?

 3.13  Exercises 3.31  [30] <§3.5> Calculate by hand 8.625 × 101 divided by −4.875 × 100. Show all the steps necessary to achieve your answer. Assume there is a guard, a round bit, and a sticky bit, and use them if necessary. Write the final answer in both the 16-bit floating-point format described in Exercise 3.27 and in decimal and compare the decimal result to that which you get if you use a calculator. 3.32  [20] <§3.10> Calculate (3.984375 × 10−1 + 3.4375 × 10−1) + 1.771 × 103 by hand, assuming each of the values is stored in the 16-bit half-precision format described in Exercise 3.27 (and also described in the text). Assume 1 guard, 1 round bit, and 1 sticky bit, and round to the nearest even. Show all the steps, and write your answer in both the 16-bit floating-point format and in decimal. 3.33  [20] <§3.10> Calculate 3.984375 × 10−1 + (3.4375 × 10−1 + 1.771 × 103) by hand, assuming each of the values is stored in the 16-bit half precision format described in Exercise 3.27 (and also described in the text). Assume 1 guard, 1 round bit, and 1 sticky bit, and round to the nearest even. Show all the steps, and write your answer in both the 16-bit floating-point format and in decimal. 3.34  [10] <§3.10> Based on your answers to Exercises 3.32 and 3.33, does (3.984375 × 10−1 + 3.4375 × 10−1) + 1.771 × 103 = 3.984375 × 10−1 + (3.4375 × 10−1 + 1.771 × 103)? 3.35  [30] <§3.10> Calculate (3.41796875 × 10−3 × 6.34765625 × 10−3) × 1.05625 × 102 by hand, assuming each of the values is stored in the 16-bit half-precision format described in Exercise 3.27 (and also described in the text). Assume 1 guard, 1 round bit, and 1 sticky bit, and round to the nearest even. Show all the steps, and write your answer in both the 16-bit floating point format and in decimal. 3.36  [30] <§3.10> Calculate 3.41796875 × 10−3 × (6.34765625 × 10−3 × 1.05625 × 102) by hand, assuming each of the values is stored in the 16-bit half precision format described in Exercise 3.27 (and also described in the text). Assume 1 guard, 1 round bit, and 1 sticky bit, and round to the nearest even. Show all the steps, and write your answer in both the 16-bit floating-point format and in decimal. 3.37  [10] <§3.10> Based on your answers to Exercises 3.35 and 3.36, does (3.41796875 × 10−3 × 6.34765625 × 10−3) × 1.05625 × 102 = 3.41796875 × 10−3 × (6.34765625 × 10−3 × 1.05625 × 102)? 3.38  [30] <§3.10> Calculate 1.666015625 × 100 × (1.9760 × 104 + −1.9744 × 104) by hand, assuming each of the values is stored in the 16-bit half-precision format described in Exercise 3.27 (and also described in the text). Assume 1 guard, 1 round bit, and 1 sticky bit, and round to the nearest even. Show all the steps, and write your answer in both the 16-bit floating-point format and in decimal. 3.39  [30] <§3.10> Calculate (1.666015625 × 100 × 1.9760 × 104) + (1.666015625 × 100 × −1.9744 × 104) by hand, assuming each of the values is stored in the 16-bit half- precision format described in Exercise 3.27 (and also described in the text). Assume 1 guard, 1 round bit, and 1 sticky bit, and round to the nearest even. Show all the steps, and write your answer in both the 16-bit floating-point format and in decimal.

Chapter 3  Arithmetic for Computers 3.40  [10] <§3.10> Based on your answers to Exercises 3.38 and 3.39, does (1.666015625 × 100 × 1.9760 × 104) + (1.666015625 × 100 × −1.9744 × 104) = 1.666015625 × 100 × (1.9760 × 104 + −1.9744 × 104)? 3.41  [10] <§3.5> Using the IEEE 754 floating-point format, write down the bit pattern that would represent −1/4. Can you represent −1/4 exactly? 3.42  [10] <§3.5> What do you get if you add −1/4 to itself four times? What is −1/4 × 4? Are they the same? What should they be? 3.43  [10] <§3.5> Write down the bit pattern in the fraction of value 1/3 assuming a floating-point format that uses binary numbers in the fraction. Assume there are 24 bits, and you do not need to normalize. Is this representation exact? 3.44  [10] <§3.5> Write down the bit pattern in the fraction of value 1/3 assuming a floating-point format that uses Binary Coded Decimal (base 10) numbers in the fraction instead of base 2. Assume there are 24 bits, and you do not need to normalize. Is this representation exact? 3.45  [10] <§3.5> Write down the bit pattern assuming that we are using base 15 numbers in the fraction of value 1/3 instead of base 2. (Base 16 numbers use the symbols 0–9 and A–F. Base 15 numbers would use 0–9 and A–E.) Assume there are 24 bits, and you do not need to normalize. Is this representation exact? 3.46  [20] <§3.5> Write down the bit pattern assuming that we are using base 30 numbers in the fraction of value 1/3 instead of base 2. (Base 16 numbers use the symbols 0–9 and A–F. Base 30 numbers would use 0–9 and A–T.) Assume there are 20 bits, and you do not need to normalize. Is this representation exact? 3.47  [45] <§§3.6, 3.7> The following C code implements a four-tap FIR filter on input array sig_in. Assume that all arrays are 16-bit fixed-point values. for (i = 3;i< 128;i+ +) sig_out[i] = sig_in[i − 3] * f[0] + sig_in[i − 2] * f[1]   + sig_in[i − 1] * f[2] + sig_in[i] * f[3]; Assume you are to write an optimized implementation of this code in assembly language on a processor that has SIMD instructions and 128-bit registers. Without knowing the details of the instruction set, briefly describe how you would implement this code, maximizing the use of sub-word operations and minimizing the amount of data that is transferred between registers and memory. State all your assumptions about the instructions you use. §3.2, page 193: 2. §3.5, page 232: 3. Answers to Check Yourself

          Computer Organization and Design RISC-V Edition. DOI: © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-820331-6.00004-1 The Processor 4.1 Introduction  254 4.2 Logic Design Conventions  258 4.3 Building a Datapath  261 4.4 A Simple Implementation Scheme  269 4.5 Multicycle Implementation  282 4.6 An Overview of Pipelining  283 4.7 Pipelined Datapath and Control  296 4.8 Data Hazards: Forwarding versus Stalling  313 4.9 Control Hazards  325 4.10 Exceptions  333 4.11 Parallelism via Instructions  340 In a major matter, no details are small. French Proverb

4.12 Putting it All Together: The Intel Core i7 6700 and ARM Cortex-A53  354 4.13 Going Faster: Instruction-Level Parallelism and Matrix Multiply  363 4.14 Advanced Topic: An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language to Describe and Model a Pipeline and More Pipelining Illustrations  365 4.15 Fallacies and Pitfalls  365 4.16 Concluding Remarks  367 4.17 Historical Perspective and Further Reading  368 4.18 Self-Study  368 4.19 Exercises  369 The Five Classic Components of a Computer

Chapter 4  The Processor 4.1 Introduction Chapter 1 explains that the performance of a computer is determined by three key factors: instruction count, clock cycle time, and clock cycles per instruction (CPI). Chapter 2 explains that the compiler and the instruction set architecture determine the instruction count required for a given program. However, the implementation of the processor determines both the clock-cycle time and the number of clock cycles per instruction. In this chapter, we construct the datapath and control unit for two different implementations of the RISC-V instruction set. This chapter contains an explanation of the principles and techniques used in implementing a processor, starting with a highly abstract and simplified overview in this section. It is followed by a section that builds up a datapath and constructs a simple version of a processor sufficient to implement an instruction set like RISC-V. The bulk of the chapter covers a more realistic pipelined RISC-V implementation, followed by a section that develops the concepts necessary to implement more complex instruction sets, like the x86. For the reader interested in understanding the high-level interpretation of instructions and its impact on program performance, this initial section and Section 4.6 present the basic concepts of pipelining. Current trends are covered in Section 4.11, and Section 4.12 describes the recent Intel Core i7 and ARM Cortex-A53 architectures. Section 4.13 shows how to use instruction-level parallelism to more than double the performance of the matrix multiply from Section 3.9. These sections provide enough background to understand the pipeline concepts at a high level. For the reader interested in understanding the processor and its performance in more depth, Sections 4.3, 4.4, and 4.7 will be useful. Those interested in learning how to build a processor should also cover Sections 4.2, 4.8–4.10. For readers with an interest in modern hardware design, Section 4.14 describes how hardware design languages and CAD tools are used to implement hardware, and then how to use a hardware design language to describe a pipelined implementation. It also gives several more illustrations of how pipelining hardware executes. A Basic RISC-V Implementation We will be examining an implementation that includes a subset of the core RISC-V instruction set: ■ The memory-reference instructions load word (lw) and store word (sw) ■ The arithmetic-logical instructions add, sub, and, and or ■ The conditional branch instruction branch if equal (beq) This subset does not include all the integer instructions (for example, shift, multiply, and divide are missing), nor does it include any floating-point instructions. 

 4.1  Introduction However, it illustrates the key principles used in creating a datapath and designing the control. The implementation of the remaining instructions is similar. In examining the implementation, we will have the opportunity to see how the instruction set architecture determines many aspects of the implementation, and how the choice of various implementation strategies affects the clock rate and CPI for the computer. Many of the key design principles introduced in Chapter 1 can be illustrated by looking at the implementation, such as Simplicity favors regularity. In addition, most concepts used to implement the RISC-V subset in this chapter are the same basic ideas that are used to construct a broad spectrum of computers, from high-performance servers to general-purpose microprocessors to embedded processors. An Overview of the Implementation In Chapter 2, we looked at the core RISC-V instructions, including the integer arithmetic-logical instructions, the memory-reference instructions, and the branch instructions. Much of what needs to be done to implement these instructions is the same, independent of the exact class of instruction. For every instruction, the first two steps are identical: 1. Send the program counter (PC) to the memory that contains the code and fetch the instruction from that memory. 2. Read one or two registers, using fields of the instruction to select the registers to read. For the lw instruction, we need to read only one register, but most other instructions require reading two registers. After these two steps, the actions required to complete the instruction depend on the instruction class. Fortunately, for each of the three instruction classes (memory-reference, arithmetic-logical, and branches), the actions are largely the same, independent of the exact instruction. The simplicity and regularity of the RISC-V instruction set simplify the implementation by making the execution of many of the instruction classes similar. For example, all instruction classes use the arithmetic-logical unit (ALU) after reading the registers. The memory-reference instructions use the ALU for an address calculation, the arithmetic-logical instructions for the operation execution, and conditional branches for the equality test. After using the ALU, the actions required to complete various instruction classes differ. A memory-reference instruction will need to access the memory either to read data for a load or write data for a store. An arithmetic-logical or load instruction must write the data from the ALU or memory back into a register. Lastly, for a conditional branch instruction, we may need to change the next instruction address based on the comparison; otherwise, the PC should be incremented by four to get the address of the subsequent instruction. Figure 4.1 shows the high-level view of a RISC-V implementation, focusing on the various functional units and their interconnection. Although this figure shows most of the flow of data through the processor, it omits two important aspects of instruction execution. First, in several places, Figure 4.1 shows data going to a particular unit as coming from two different sources. For example, the value written into the PC can come 

Chapter 4  The Processor from one of two adders, the data written into the register file can come from either the ALU or the data memory, and the second input to the ALU can come from a register or the immediate field of the instruction. In practice, these data lines cannot simply be wired together; we must add a logic element that chooses from among the multiple sources and steers one of those sources to its destination. This selection is commonly done with a device called a multiplexor, although this device might better be called a data selector. Appendix A describes the multiplexor, which selects from among several inputs based on the setting of its control lines. The control lines are set based primarily on information taken from the instruction being executed. The second omission in Figure 4.1 is that several of the units must be controlled depending on the type of instruction. For example, the data memory must read on a load and write on a store. The register file must be written only on a load or FIGURE 4.1  An abstract view of the implementation of the RISC-V subset showing the major functional units and the major connections between them. All instructions start by using the program counter to supply the instruction address to the instruction memory. After the instruction is fetched, the register operands used by an instruction are specified by fields of that instruction. Once the register operands have been fetched, they can be operated on to compute a memory address (for a load or store), to compute an arithmetic result (for an integer arithmetic-logical instruction), or an equality check (for a branch). If the instruction is an arithmetic-logical instruction, the result from the ALU must be written to a register. If the operation is a load or store, the ALU result is used as an address to either load a value from memory into the registers or store a value from the registers. The result from the ALU or memory is written back into the register file. Branches require the use of the ALU output to determine the next instruction address, which comes either from the adder (where the PC and branch offset are summed) or from an adder that increments the current PC by four. The thick lines interconnecting the functional units represent buses, which consist of multiple signals. The arrows are used to guide the reader in knowing how information flows. Since signal lines may cross, we explicitly show when crossing lines are connected by the presence of a dot where the lines cross. Data PC Address Instruction Instruction memory Registers ALU Address Data Data memory Add Add Register # Register # Register #

 4.1  Introduction an arithmetic-logical instruction. And, of course, the ALU must perform one of several operations. (Appendix A describes the detailed design of the ALU.) Like the multiplexors, control lines to are set based on various fields in the instruction direct these operations. Figure 4.2 shows the datapath of Figure 4.1 with the three required multiplexors added, as well as control lines for the major functional units. A control unit, which has the instruction as an input, is used to determine how to set the control lines for the functional units and two of the multiplexors. The top multiplexor, which FIGURE 4.2  The basic implementation of the RISC-V subset, including the necessary multiplexors and control lines. The top multiplexor (“Mux”) controls what value replaces the PC (PC + 4 or the branch destination address); the multiplexor is controlled by the gate that “ANDs” together the Zero output of the ALU and a control signal that indicates that the instruction is a branch. The middle multiplexor, whose output returns to the register file, is used to steer the output of the ALU (in the case of an arithmetic-logical instruction) or the output of the data memory (in the case of a load) for writing into the register file. Finally, the bottom-most multiplexor is used to determine whether the second ALU input is from the registers (for an arithmetic-logical instruction or a branch) or from the offset field of the instruction (for a load or store). The added control lines are straightforward and determine the operation performed at the ALU, whether the data memory should read or write, and whether the registers should perform a write operation. The control lines are shown in color to make them easier to see. Data PC Address Instruction Instruction memory Registers ALU Address Data Data memory Add Add MemWrite MemRead M u x M u x M u x Control RegWrite Zero Branch ALU operation Register # Register # Register #

Chapter 4  The Processor determines whether PC + 4 or the branch destination address is written into the PC, is set based on the Zero output of the ALU, which is used to perform the comparison of a beq instruction. The regularity and simplicity of the RISC-V instruction set mean that a simple decoding process can be used to determine how to set the control lines. In the remainder of the chapter, we refine this view to fill in the details, which requires that we add further functional units, increase the number of connections between units, and, of course, enhance a control unit to control what actions are taken for different instruction classes. Sections 4.3 and 4.4 describe a simple implementation that uses a single long clock cycle for every instruction and follows the general form of Figures 4.1 and 4.2. In this first design, every instruction begins execution on one clock edge and completes execution on the next clock edge. While easier to understand, this approach is not practical, since the clock cycle must be severely stretched to accommodate the longest instruction. After designing the control for this simple computer, we will look at faster implementations with all their complexities, including exceptions. How many of the five classic components of a computer—shown on page 253—do Figures 4.1 and 4.2 include? Check Yourself 4.2 Logic Design Conventions To discuss the design of a computer, we must decide how the hardware logic implementing the computer will operate and how the computer is clocked. This section reviews a few key ideas in digital logic that we will use extensively in this chapter. If you have little or no background in digital logic, you will find it helpful to read Appendix A before continuing. The datapath elements in the RISC-V implementation consist of two different types of logic elements: elements that operate on data values and elements that contain state. The elements that operate on data values are all combinational, which means that their outputs depend only on the current inputs. Given the same input, a combinational element always produces the same output. The ALU in Figure 4.1 and discussed in Appendix A is an example of a combinational element. Given a set of inputs, it always produces the same output because it has no internal storage. Other elements in the design are not combinational, but instead contain state. An element contains state if it has some internal storage. We call these elements state elements because, if we pulled the power plug on the computer, we could restart it accurately by loading the state elements with the values they contained before we pulled the plug. Furthermore, if we saved and restored the state elements, it would be as if the computer had never lost power. Thus, these state elements completely characterize the computer. In Figure 4.1, the instruction and data memories, as well as the registers, are all examples of state elements. combinational element  An operational element, such as an AND gate or an ALU state element  A memory element, such as a register or a memory.

 4.2  Logic Design Conventions A state element has at least two inputs and one output. The required inputs are the data value to be written into the element and the clock, which determines when the data value is written. The output from a state element provides the value that was written in an earlier clock cycle. For example, one of the logically simplest state elements is a D-type flip-flop (see Appendix A), which has exactly these two inputs (a value and a clock) and one output. In addition to flip-flops, our RISC-V implementation uses two other types of state elements: memories and registers, both of which appear in Figure 4.1. The clock is used to determine when the state element should be written; a state element can be read at any time. Logic components that contain state are also called sequential, because their outputs depend on both their inputs and the contents of the internal state. For example, the output from the functional unit representing the registers depends both on the register numbers supplied and on what was written into the registers previously. Appendix A discusses the operation of both the combinational and sequential elements and their construction in more detail. Clocking Methodology A clocking methodology defines when signals can be read and when they can be written. It is important to specify the timing of reads and writes, because if a signal is written at the same time that it is read, the value of the read could correspond to the old value, the newly written value, or even some mix of the two! Computer designs cannot tolerate such unpredictability. A clocking methodology is designed to make hardware predictable. For simplicity, we will assume an edge-triggered clocking methodology. An edge-triggered clocking methodology means that any values stored in a sequential logic element are updated only on a clock edge, which is a quick transition from low to high or vice versa (see Figure 4.3). Because only state elements can store a data value, any collection of combinational logic must have its inputs come from a set of state elements and its outputs written into a set of state elements. The inputs are values that were written in a previous clock cycle, while the outputs are values that can be used in a following clock cycle. clocking methodology  The approach used to determine when data are valid and stable relative to the clock. edge-triggered clocking  A clocking scheme in which all state changes occur on a clock edge. FIGURE 4.3  Combinational logic, state elements, and the clock are closely related. In a synchronous digital system, the clock determines when elements with state will write values into internal storage. Any inputs to a state element must reach a stable value (that is, have reached a value from which they will not change until after the clock edge) before the active clock edge causes the state to be updated. All state elements in this chapter, including memory, are assumed positive edge-triggered; that is, they change on the rising clock edge. State element State element Combinational logic Clock cycle

Chapter 4  The Processor Figure 4.3 shows the two state elements surrounding a block of combinational logic, which operates in a single clock cycle: all signals must propagate from state element 1, through the combinational logic, and to state element 2 in the time of one clock cycle. The time necessary for the signals to reach state element 2 defines the length of the clock cycle. For simplicity, we do not show a write control signal when a state element is written on every active clock edge. In contrast, if a state element is not updated on every clock, then an explicit write control signal is required. Both the clock signal and the write control signal are inputs, and the state element is changed only when the write control signal is asserted and a clock edge occurs. We will use the word asserted to indicate a signal that is logically high and assert to specify that a signal should be driven logically high, and deassert or deasserted to represent logically low. We use the terms assert and deassert because when we implement hardware, at times 1 represents logically high and at times it can represent logically low. An edge-triggered methodology allows us to read the contents of a register, send the value through some combinational logic, and write that register in the same clock cycle. Figure 4.4 gives a generic example. It doesn’t matter whether we assume that all writes take place on the rising clock edge (from low to high) or on the falling clock edge (from high to low), since the inputs to the combinational logic block cannot change except on the chosen clock edge. In this book, we use the rising clock edge. With an edge-triggered timing methodology, there is no feedback within a single clock cycle, and the logic in Figure 4.4 works correctly. In Appendix A, we briefly discuss additional timing constraints (such as setup and hold times) as well as other timing methodologies. For the 32-bit RISC-V architecture, nearly all of these state and logic elements will have inputs and outputs that are 32 bits wide, since that is the width of most of the data handled by the processor. We will make it clear whenever a unit has an input or output that is other than 32 bits in width. The figures will indicate buses, which are signals wider than 1 bit, with thicker lines. At times, we will want to combine several buses to form a wider bus; for example, we may want to obtain a 32-bit bus by combining two 16-bit buses. In such cases, labels on the bus lines control signal  A signal used for multiplexor selection or for directing the operation of a functional unit; contrasts with a data signal, which contains information that is operated on by a functional unit. asserted  The signal is logically high or true. deasserted  The signal is logically low or false. FIGURE 4.4  An edge-triggered methodology allows a state element to be read and written in the same clock cycle without creating a race that could lead to indeterminate data values. Of course, the clock cycle still must be long enough so that the input values are stable when the active clock edge occurs. Feedback cannot occur within one clock cycle because of the edge-triggered update of the state element. If feedback were possible, this design could not work properly. Our designs in this chapter and the next rely on the edge-triggered timing methodology and on structures like the one shown in this figure. State element Combinational logic

 4.3  Building a Datapath will make it clear that we are concatenating buses to form a wider bus. Arrows are also added to help clarify the direction of the flow of data between elements. Finally, color indicates a control signal contrary to a signal that carries data; this distinction will become clearer as we proceed through this chapter. True or false: Because the register file is both read and written on the same clock cycle, any RISC-V datapath using edge-triggered writes must have more than one copy of the register file. Check Yourself Elaboration:  There is also a 64-bit version of the RISC-V architecture, and, naturally enough, most paths in its implementation would be 64 bits wide. 4.3 Building a Datapath A reasonable way to start a datapath design is to examine the major components required to execute each class of RISC-V instructions. Let’s start at the top by looking at which datapath elements each instruction needs, and then work our way down through the levels of abstraction. When we show the datapath elements, we will also show their control signals. We use abstraction in this explanation, starting from the bottom up. Figure 4.5a shows the first element we need: a memory unit to store the instructions of a program and supply instructions given an address. Figure 4.5b also shows the program counter (PC), which as we saw in Chapter 2 is a register that holds the address of the current instruction. Lastly, we will need an adder to increment the PC to the address of the next instruction. This adder, which is combinational, can be built from the ALU described in detail in Appendix A simply by wiring the control lines so that the control always specifies an add operation. We will draw such an ALU with the label Add, as in Figure 4.5c, to indicate that it has been permanently made an adder and cannot perform the other ALU functions. To execute any instruction, we must start by fetching the instruction from memory. To prepare for executing the next instruction, we must also increment the program counter so that it points at the next instruction, 4 bytes later. Figure 4.6 shows how to combine the three elements from Figure 4.5 to form the portion of a datapath that fetches instructions and increments the PC to obtain the address of the next sequential instruction. Now let’s consider the R-format instructions (see Figure 2.19 on page 127). They all read two registers, perform an ALU operation on the contents of the registers, and write the result to a register. We call these instructions either R-type instructions or arithmetic-logical instructions (since they perform arithmetic or logical operations). This instruction class includes add, sub, and, and or, which datapath element  A unit used to operate on or hold data within a processor. In the RISC-V implementation, the datapath elements include the instruction and data memories, the register file, the ALU, and adders. program counter (PC)  The register containing the address of the instruction in the program being executed.

Chapter 4  The Processor were introduced in Chapter 2. Recall that a typical instance of such an instruction is add x1, x2, x3, which reads x2 and x3 and writes the sum into x1. The processor’s 32 general-purpose registers are stored in a structure called a register file. A register file is a collection of registers in which any register can be read or written by specifying the number of the register in the file. The register file contains the register state of the computer. In addition, we will need an ALU to operate on the values read from the registers. R-format instructions have three register operands, so we will need to read two data words from the register file and write one data word into the register file for each instruction. For each data word to be read from the registers, we need an input to the register file that specifies the register number to be read and an output from the register file that will carry the value that has been read from the registers. To write a data word, we will need two inputs: one to specify the register number to be written and one to supply the data to be written into the register. The register file always outputs the contents of whatever register numbers are on the Read register inputs. Writes, however, are controlled by the write control signal, which must be asserted for a write to occur at the clock edge. Figure 4.7a shows the result; we need a total of three inputs (two for register numbers and one for data) and two outputs (both for data). The register number inputs are 5 bits wide to specify one of 32 registers (32 = 25), whereas the data input and two data output buses are each 32 bits wide. Figure 4.7b shows the ALU, which takes two 32-bit inputs and produces a 32-bit result, as well as a 1-bit signal if the result is 0. The 4-bit control signal of the ALU is described in detail in Appendix A; we will review the ALU control shortly when we need to know how to set it. register file  A state element that consists of a set of registers that can be read and written by supplying a register number to be accessed. FIGURE 4.5  Two state elements are needed to store and access instructions, and an adder is needed to compute the next instruction address. The state elements are the instruction memory and the program counter. The instruction memory need only provide read access because the datapath does not write instructions. Since the instruction memory only reads, we treat it as combinational logic: the output at any time reflects the contents of the location specified by the address input, and no read control signal is needed. (We will need to write the instruction memory when we load the program; this is not hard to add, and we ignore it for simplicity.) The program counter is a 32-bit register that is written at the end of every clock cycle and thus does not need a write control signal. The adder is an ALU wired to always add its two 32-bit inputs and place the sum on its output. Instruction address Instruction Instruction memory a. Instruction memory PC b. Program counter Add Sum c. Adder

 4.3  Building a Datapath FIGURE 4.6  A portion of the datapath used for fetching instructions and incrementing the program counter. The fetched instruction is used by other parts of the datapath. FIGURE 4.7  The two elements needed to implement R-format ALU operations are the register file and the ALU. The register file contains all the registers and has two read ports and one write port. The design of multiported register files is discussed in Section A.8 of Appendix A. The register file always outputs the contents of the registers corresponding to the Read register inputs on the outputs; no other control inputs are needed. In contrast, a register write must be explicitly indicated by asserting the write control signal. Remember that writes are edge-triggered, so that all the write inputs (i.e., the value to be written, the register number, and the write control signal) must be valid at the clock edge. Since writes to the register file are edge-triggered, our design can legally read and write the same register within a clock cycle: the read will get the value written in an earlier clock cycle, while the value written will be available to a read in a subsequent clock cycle. The inputs carrying the register number to the register file are all 5 bits wide, whereas the lines carrying data values are 32 bits wide. The operation to be performed by the ALU is controlled with the ALU operation signal, which will be 4 bits wide, using the ALU designed in Appendix A. We will use the Zero detection output of the ALU shortly to implement conditional branches. PC Read address Instruction Instruction memory Add Read register 1 Registers ALU Data Data Zero ALU result RegWrite a. Registers b. ALU Register numbers Read data 1 Read data 2 ALU operation Read register 2 Write register Write Data

Chapter 4  The Processor Next, consider the RISC-V load register and store register instructions, which have the general form lw x1, offset(x2) or sw x1, offset(x2). These instructions compute a memory address by adding the base register, which is x2, to the 12-bit signed offset field contained in the instruction. If the instruction is a store, the value to be stored must also be read from the register file where it resides in x1. If the instruction is a load, the value read from memory must be written into the register file in the specified register, which is x1. Thus, we will need both the register file and the ALU from Figure 4.7. Furthermore, we will need a unit to sign-extend the 12-bit offset field in the instruction to a 32-bit signed value, and a data memory unit to read from or write to. The data memory must be written on store instructions; hence, data memory has read and write control signals, an address input, and an input for the data to be written into memory. Figure 4.8 shows these two elements. The beq instruction has three operands, two registers that are compared for equality, and a 12-bit offset used to compute the branch target address relative to the branch instruction address. Its form is beq x1, x2, offset. To implement this instruction, we must compute the branch target address by adding the sign- extended offset field of the instruction to the PC. There are two details in the definition of branch instructions (see Chapter 2) to which we must pay attention: ■ The instruction set architecture specifies that the base for the branch address calculation is the address of the branch instruction. ■ The architecture also states that the offset field is shifted left 1 bit so that it is a half word offset; this shift increases the effective range of the offset field by a factor of 2. To deal with the latter complication, we will need to shift the offset field by 1. As well as computing the branch target address, we must also determine whether the next instruction is the instruction that follows sequentially or the instruction at the branch target address. When the condition is true (i.e., two operands are equal), the branch target address becomes the new PC, and we say that the branch is taken. If the operand is not zero, the incremented PC should replace the current PC (just as for any other normal instruction); in this case, we say that the branch is not taken. Thus, the branch datapath must do two operations: compute the branch target address and test the register contents. (Branches also affect the instruction fetch portion of the datapath, as we will deal with shortly.) Figure 4.9 shows the structure of the datapath segment that handles branches. To compute the branch target address, the branch datapath includes an immediate generation unit, from Figure 4.8 and an adder. To perform the compare, we need to use the register file shown in Figure 4.7a to supply two register operands (although we will not need to write into the register file). In addition, the equality comparison can be done using the ALU we designed in Appendix A. Since that ALU provides an output signal that indicates whether the result was 0, we can send both register operands to the ALU sign-extend  To increase the size of a data item by replicating the high-order sign bit of the original data item in the high- order bits of the larger, destination data item. branch target address  The address specified in a branch, which becomes the new program counter (PC) if the branch is taken. In the RISC-V architecture, the branch target is given by the sum of the offset field of the instruction and the address of the branch. branch taken  A branch where the branch condition is satisfied and the program counter (PC) becomes the branch target. All unconditional branches are taken branches. branch not taken or (untaken branch)  A branch where the branch condition is false and the program counter (PC) becomes the address of the instruction that sequentially follows the branch.

 4.3  Building a Datapath with the control set to subtract two values. If the Zero signal out of the ALU unit is asserted, we know that the register values are equal. Although the Zero output always signals if the result is 0, we will be using it only to implement the equality test of conditional branches. Later, we will show exactly how to connect the control signals of the ALU for use in the datapath. The branch instruction operates by adding the PC with the 12 bits of the instruction shifted left by 1 bit. Simply concatenating 0 to the branch offset accomplishes this shift, as described in Chapter 2. Creating a Single Datapath Now that we have examined the datapath components needed for the individual instruction classes, we can combine them into a single datapath and add the control to complete the implementation. This simplest datapath will attempt to execute all instructions in one clock cycle. Thus, that no datapath resource can be used more than once per instruction, so any element needed more than once must be duplicated. We therefore need a memory for instructions separate from one for data. Although some of the functional units will need to be duplicated, many of the elements can be shared by different instruction flows. FIGURE 4.8  The two units needed to implement loads and stores, in addition to the register file and ALU of Figure 4.7, are the data memory unit and the immediate generation unit. The memory unit is a state element with inputs for the address and the write data, and a single output for the read result. There are separate read and write controls, although only one of these may be asserted on any given clock. The memory unit needs a read signal, since, unlike the register file, reading the value of an invalid address can cause problems, as we will see in Chapter 5. The immediate generation unit (ImmGen) has a 32-bit instruction as input that selects a 12-bit field for load, store, and branch if equal that is sign-extended into a 32-bit result appearing on the output (see Chapter 2). We assume the data memory is edge-triggered for writes. Standard memory chips actually have a write enable signal that is used for writes. Although the write enable is not edge-triggered, our edge-triggered design could easily be adapted to work with real memory chips. See Section A.8 of Appendix A for further discussion of how real memory chips work. Address Read data Data memory a. Data memory unit Write data MemRead MemWrite b. Immediate generation unit Imm Gen

Chapter 4  The Processor To share a datapath element between two different instruction classes, we may need to allow multiple connections to the input of an element, using a multiplexor and control signal to select among the multiple inputs. Building a Datapath The operations of arithmetic-logical (or R-type) instructions and the memory instructions datapath are quite similar. The key differences are the following: ■ The arithmetic-logical instructions use the ALU, with the inputs coming from the two registers. The memory instructions can also use the ALU to do the address calculation, although the second input is the sign- extended 12-bit offset field from the instruction. ■ The value stored into a destination register comes from the ALU (for an R-type instruction) or the memory (for a load). EXAMPLE FIGURE 4.9  The portion of a datapath for a branch uses the ALU to evaluate the branch condition and a separate adder to compute the branch target as the sum of the PC and immediate (the branch displacement). Control logic is used to decide whether the incremented PC or branch target should replace the PC, based on the Zero output of the ALU. Read register 1 Registers ALU Zero RegWrite Read data 1 Read data 2 ALU operation To branch control logic Add Sum Branch target PCfrom instruction datapath Imm Gen Instruction Read register 2 Write register Write data

 4.3  Building a Datapath Show how to build a datapath for the operational portion of the memory- reference and arithmetic-logical instructions that uses a single register file and a single ALU to handle both types of instructions, adding any necessary multiplexors. To create a datapath with only a single register file and a single ALU, we must support two different sources for the second ALU input, as well as two different sources for the data stored into the register file. Thus, one multiplexor is placed at the ALU input and another at the data input to the register file. Figure 4.10 shows the operational portion of the combined datapath. Now we can combine all the pieces to make a simple datapath for the core RISC-V architecture by adding the datapath for instruction fetch (Figure 4.6), the datapath from R-type and memory instructions (Figure 4.10), and the datapath for branches (Figure 4.9). Figure 4.11 shows the datapath we obtain by composing the separate pieces. The branch instruction uses the main ALU to compare two register operands for equality, so we must keep the adder from Figure 4.9 for computing the branch target address. An additional multiplexor is required to select either the sequentially following instruction address (PC + 4) or the branch target address to be written into the PC. ANSWER FIGURE 4.10  The datapath for the memory instructions and the R-type instructions. This example shows how a single datapath can be assembled from the pieces in Figures 4.7 and 4.8 by adding multiplexors. Two multiplexors are needed, as described in the example. Read register 1 Read register 2 Write register Write data Write data Registers ALU Zero RegWrite MemRead MemWrite MemtoReg Read data 1 Read data 2 ALU operation Imm Gen Instruction ALU result M u x M u x ALUSrc Address Data memory Read data

Chapter 4  The Processor I. Which of the following is correct for a load instruction? Refer to Figure 4.10. a. MemtoReg should be set to cause the data from memory to be sent to the register file. b. MemtoReg should be set to cause the correct register destination to be sent to the register file. c. We do not care about the setting of MemtoReg for loads. II. The single-cycle datapath conceptually described in this section must have separate instruction and data memories, because a. the formats of data and instructions are different in RISC-V, and hence different memories are needed; b. having separate memories is less expensive; c. the processor operates in one clock cycle and cannot use a (single- ported) memory for two different accesses within that clock cycle. Check Yourself FIGURE 4.11  The simple datapath for the core RISC-V architecture combines the elements required by different instruction classes. The components come from Figures 4.6, 4.9, and 4.10. This datapath can execute the basic instructions (load-store register, ALU operations, and branches) in a single clock cycle. Just one additional multiplexor is needed to integrate branches. Read register 1 Write data Registers ALU Add Zero RegWrite MemRead MemWrite PCSrc MemtoReg Read data 1 Read data 2 ALU operation Imm Gen Instruction ALU result Add Sum M u x M u x M u x ALUSrc Address Data memory Read data Read address Instruction memory PC Read register 2 Write register Write data

 4.4  A Simple Implementation Scheme Now that we have completed this simple datapath, we can add the control unit. The control unit must be able to take inputs and generate a write signal for each state element, the selector control for each multiplexor, and the ALU control. The ALU control is different in a number of ways, and it will be useful to design it first before we design the rest of the control unit. Elaboration:  The immediate generation logic must choose between sign-extending a 12-bit field in instruction bits 31:20 for load instructions, bits 31:25 and 11:7 for store instructions, or bits 31, 7, 30:25, and 11:8 for the conditional branch. Since the input is all 32 bits of the instruction, it can use the opcode bits of the instruction to select the proper field. RISC-V opcode bit 6 happens to be 0 for data transfer instructions and 1 for conditional branches, and RISC-V opcode bit 5 happens to be 0 for load instructions and 1 for store instructions. Thus, bits 5 and 6 can control a 3:1 multiplexor inside the immediate generation logic that selects the appropriate 12-bit field for load, store, and conditional branch instructions. 4.4 A Simple Implementation Scheme In this section, we look at what might be thought of as a simple implementation of our RISC-V subset. We build this simple implementation using the datapath of the last section and adding a simple control function. This simple implementation covers load word (lw), store word (sw), branch if equal (beq), and the arithmetic- logical instructions add, sub, and, and or. The ALU Control The RISC-V ALU in Appendix A defines the four following combinations of four control inputs: ALU control lines Function AND OR add subtract Depending on the instruction class, the ALU will need to perform one of these four functions. For load and store instructions, we use the ALU to compute the memory address by addition. For the R-type instructions, the ALU needs to perform one of the four actions (AND, OR, add, or subtract), depending on the value of the 7-bit funct7 field (bits 31:25) and 3-bit funct3 field (bits 14:12) in the instruction (see Chapter 2). For the conditional branch if equal instruction, the ALU subtracts two operands and tests to see if the result is 0.

Chapter 4  The Processor We can generate the 4-bit ALU control input using a small control unit that has as inputs the funct7 and funct3 fields of the instruction and a 2-bit control field, which we call ALUOp. ALUOp indicates whether the operation to be performed should be add (00) for loads and stores, subtract and test if zero (01) for beq, or be determined by the operation encoded in the funct7 and funct3 fields (10). The output of the ALU control unit is a 4-bit signal that directly controls the ALU by generating one of the 4-bit combinations shown previously. In Figure 4.12, we show how to set the ALU control inputs based on the 2-bit ALUOp control, funct7, and funct3 fields. Later in this chapter, we will see how the ALUOp bits are generated from the main control unit. This style of using multiple levels of decoding—that is, the main control unit generates the ALUOp bits, which then are used as input to the ALU control that generates the actual signals to control the ALU unit—is a common implementation technique. Using multiple levels of control can reduce the size of the main control unit. Using several smaller control units may also potentially reduce the latency of the control unit. Such optimizations are important, since the latency of the control unit is often a critical factor in determining the clock cycle time. There are several different ways to implement the mapping from the 2-bit ALUOp field and the funct fields to the four ALU operation control bits. Because only a small number of the possible funct field values are of interest and funct fields are used only when the ALUOp bits equal 10, we can use a small piece of logic that recognizes the subset of possible values and generates the appropriate ALU control signals. FIGURE 4.12  How the ALU control bits are set depends on the ALUOp control bits and the different opcodes for the R-type instruction. The instruction, listed in the first column, determines the setting of the ALUOp bits. All the encodings are shown in binary. Notice that when the ALUOp code is 00 or 01, the desired ALU action does not depend on the funct7 or funct3 fields; in this case, we say that we “don’t care” about the value of the opcode, and the bits are shown as Xs. When the ALUOp value is 10, then the funct7 and funct3 fields are used to set the ALU control input. See Appendix A.

 4.4  A Simple Implementation Scheme truth table  From logic, a representation of a logical operation by listing all the values of the inputs and then in each case showing what the resulting outputs should be. As a step in designing this logic, it is useful to create a truth table for the interesting combinations of funct fields and the ALUOp signals, as we’ve done in Figure 4.13; this truth table shows how the 4-bit ALU control is set depending on these input fields. Since the full truth table is very large, and we don’t care about the value of the ALU control for many of these input combinations, we show only the truth table entries for which the ALU control must have a specific value. Throughout this chapter, we will use this practice of showing only the truth table entries for outputs that must be asserted and not showing those that are all deasserted or don’t care. (This practice has a disadvantage, which we discuss in Section C.2 of Appendix C.) Because in many instances we do not care about the values of some of the inputs, and because we wish to keep the tables compact, we also include don’t-care terms. A don’t-care term in this truth table (represented by an X in an input column) indicates that the output does not depend on the value of the input corresponding to that column. For example, when the ALUOp bits are 00, as in the first row of Figure 4.13, we always set the ALU control to 0010, independent of the funct fields. In this case, then, the funct inputs will be don’t cares in this line of the truth table. Later, we will see examples of another type of don’t-care term. If you are unfamiliar with the concept of don’t-care terms, see Appendix A for more information. Once the truth table has been constructed, it can be optimized and then turned into gates. This process is completely mechanical. Thus, rather than show the final steps here, we describe the process and the result in Section C.2 of Appendix C. Designing the Main Control Unit Now that we have described how to design an ALU that uses the opcode and a 2-bit signal as its control inputs, we can return to looking at the rest of the control. To start this process, let’s identify the fields of an instruction and the control lines that are needed for the datapath we constructed in Figure 4.11. To understand how to connect the fields of an instruction to the datapath, it is useful to review don’t-care term  An element of a logical function in which the output does not depend on the values of all the inputs. Don’t-care terms may be specified in different ways. FIGURE 4.13  The truth table for the 4 ALU control bits (called Operation). The inputs are the ALUOp and funct fields. Only the entries for which the ALU control is asserted are shown. Some don’t-care entries have been added. For example, the ALUOp does not use the encoding 11, so the truth table can contain entries 1X and X1, rather than 10 and 01. While we show all 10 bits of funct fields, note that the only bits with different values for the four R-format instructions are bits 30, 14, 13, and 12. Thus, we only need these four funct field bits as input for ALU control instead of all 10.

Chapter 4  The Processor the formats of the four instruction classes: arithmetic, load, store, and conditional branch instructions. Figure 4.14 shows these formats. There are several major observations about this instruction format that we will rely on: ■ The opcode field, which as we saw in Chapter  2, is always in bits 6:0. Depending on the opcode, the funct3 field (bits 14:12) and funct7 field (bits 31:25) serve as an extended opcode field. ■ The first register operand is always in bit positions 19:15 (rs1) for R-type instructions and branch instructions. This field also specifies the base register for load and store instructions. ■ The second register operand is always in bit positions 24:20 (rs2) for R-type instructions and branch instructions. This field also specifies the register operand that gets copied to memory for store instructions. ■ Another operand can also be a 12-bit offset for branch or load-store instructions. ■ The destination register is always in bit positions 11:7 (rd) for R-type instructions and load instructions. The first design principle from Chapter 2—simplicity favors regularity—pays off here simplifying control of the datapath. opcode  The field that denotes the operation and format of an instruction. FIGURE 4.14  The four instruction classes (arithmetic, load, store, and conditional branch) use four different instruction formats. (a) Instruction format for R-type arithmetic instructions (opcode = 51ten), which have three register operands: rs1, rs2, and rd. Fields rs1 and rd are sources, and rd is the destination. The ALU function is in the funct3 and funct7 fields and is decoded by the ALU control design in the previous section. The R-type instructions that we implement are add, sub, and, and or. (b) Instruction format for I-type load instructions (opcode = 3ten). The register rs1 is the base register that is added to the 12-bit immediate field to form the memory address. Field rd is the destination register for the loaded value. (c) Instruction format for S-type store instructions (opcode = 35ten). The register rs1 is the base register that is added to the 12-bit immediate field to form the memory address. (The immediate field is split into a 7-bit piece and a 5-bit piece.) Field rs2 is the source register whose value should be stored into memory. (d) Instruction format for SB-type conditional branch instructions (opcode = 99ten). The registers rs1 and rs2 compared. The 12-bit immediate address field is sign-extended, shifted left 1 bit, and added to the PC to compute the branch target address. Figures 4.17 and 4.18 give the rationale for the unusual bit ordering for SB-type.

 4.4  A Simple Implementation Scheme Compared with MIPS, RISC-V has instruction formats that look more complicated but actually simplify the hardware. This can even improve the clock cycle time of some RISC-V implementations, especially the pipelined versions we see in Section 4.6. Since compilers, assemblers, and debuggers hide details of the instruction format from the programmer, why not pick formats that help the hardware? The first example is the store instruction format. Figure 4.15 shows the MIPS instruction formats for data transfer and arithmetic instructions and their impact on the datapath. MIPS requires a 2:1 multiplexor to specify which field supplies the number of the register to be written, which is unnecessary in Figure 4.15. That multiplexor could be on a critical timing path that would stretch the clock cycle time. To keep the destination register always in bits 11 to 7 of all instructions, the RISC-V S format has to split the immediate field into two pieces: bits 31 to 25 have immediate[11:5] and bits 11 to 7 have immediate[4:0]. It looks odd compared with MIPS, which keeps the immediate field contiguous, but the RISC-V assembler hides this complexity, and the hardware benefits. op rs rt rd shamt funct 6 bit 5 bit 5 bit 5 bit 5 bit 6 bit R Format: Arithmetic op rs rt constant or address 6 bit 5 bit 5 bit 16 bit I format: Data transfers, Immediates The second example looks even odder. Figure 4.16 shows that RISC-V has two formats where all the fields are the same size and are immediates as in two other formats—SB versus S and UJ versus U—but the bits are swirled around. The SB and UJ formats once again simplify hardware by giving the assembler more work to do. The figures below show what the immediate generator hardware must do for RISC-V. Figure 4.17 shows which bits of the instruction correspond RegDst Read address Instruction [25:21] Instruction [20:16] Instruction [15:11] Instruction [31:0] Instruction memory Read register 1 Read data 1 Read data 2 Read register 2 Write register Write data Registers M u x FIGURE 4.15  The MIPS, arithmetic instruction format, data transfer instruction format, and their impact on the MIPS datapath. For MIPS arithmetic instructions using the R format, rd is the destination register, rs is the first register operand, and rt is the second register operand. For MIPS load and immediate instructions, rs is still the first register operand, but rt is now the destination register. Hence the need of the 2:1 multiplexor to pick between the rd and rt fields to write the correct register. Hardware/ Software Interface

Chapter 4  The Processor FIGURE 4.17  Inputs to immediate if hypotheticaly conditional branches use the S format, and if jumps, use the U format. Instruction Immediate Output Bit by Bit i31 i31 i31 i31 i31 i31 i31 i31 i31 i31 i31 i31 i31 i31 i31 i31 i31 i31 i31 i31 i31 i30 i29 i28 i27 i26 i25 i24 i23 i22 i21 i20 “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ i11 i10 i9 i8 i7 “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ i30 i29 i28 i27 i26 i25 i24 “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ i30 i29 i28 i27 i26 i25 i24 i23 i22 i21 i20 i19 i18 i17 i16 i15 i14 i13 i12 “ “ i30 i29 i28 i27 i26 i25 i24 i23 i22 i21 i20 i19 i18 i17 i16 i15 i14 i13 i12 “ 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 Immediate Input Bit by Bit Load, Arith. Imm. Load Upper Imm. Unique Inputs Store Cond. Branch Uncond. Jump Format I U S S U FIGURE 4.18  Inputs to immediate given that branches use the SB format and jumps use the UJ format, which is what RISC-V uses. Instruction Immediate Output Bit by Bit i31 i31 i31 i31 i31 i31 i31 i31 i31 i31 i31 i31 i31 i31 i31 i31 i31 i31 i31 i31 i31 i30 i29 i28 i27 i26 i25 i24 i23 i22 i21 i20 “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ i11 i10 i9 i8 i7 “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ i7 “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ i19 i18 i17 i16 i15 i14 i13 i12 i20 “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ i30 i29 i28 i27 i26 i25 i24 i23 i22 i21 i20 “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 Immediate Input Bit by Bit Load, Arith. Imm. Load Upper Imm. Unique Inputs Store Cond. Branch Uncond. Jump Format I U S SB UJ to the immediate field bits depending on the type of instruction, if hypothetically the conditional branch instructions used the S format instead of SB and the unconditional branch instructions used the U format instead of UJ. The last row shows the number of unique inputs per output bit, which determines the number of ports to a multiplexor in the immediate generator. In contrast, Figure 4.18 shows the actual formats for the branch and jumps, and the reduced number of unique inputs. The SB and UJ formats reduce the multiplexors for immediate bits 19 to 12 from 3:1 to 2:1 multiplexors and immediate bits 10 to 1 from 4:1 to 2:1. Once again, RISC-V architects designed odd-looking but efficient formats, simplifying 18 1-bit multiplexors. The savings are insignificant for high- end processors but helpful for very low-end processors, and the only cost is borne by the assembler (and your author). Using this information, we can add the instruction labels to the simple datapath. Figure 4.19 shows these additions plus the ALU control block, the write signals for FIGURE 4.16  The actual RISC-V formats. Figure 4.16 introduces R-, I-, S-, and U-types, which are straightforward.

 4.4  A Simple Implementation Scheme state elements, the read signal for the data memory, and the control signals for the multiplexors. Since all the multiplexors have two inputs, they each require a single control line. Figure 4.19 shows six single-bit control lines plus the 2-bit ALUOp control signal. We have already defined how the ALUOp control signal works, and it is useful to define what the six other control signals do informally before we determine how to set these control signals during instruction execution. Figure 4.20 describes the function of these six control lines. Now that we have looked at the function of each of the control signals, we can look at how to set them. The control unit can set all but one of the control signals based solely on the opcode and funct fields of the instruction. The PCSrc control line is the exception. That control line should be asserted if the instruction is branch if equal (a decision that the control unit can make) and the Zero output of the ALU, which is used for the equality test, is asserted. To generate the PCSrc signal, we will need to AND together a signal from the control unit, which we call Branch, with the Zero signal out of the ALU. These eight control signals (six from Figure 4.20 and two for ALUOp) can now be set based on the input signals to the control unit, which are the opcode bits 6:0. Figure 4.21 shows the datapath with the control unit and the control signals. FIGURE 4.19  The datapath of Figure 4.11 with all necessary multiplexors and all control lines identified. The control lines are shown in color. The ALU control block has also been added, which depends on the funct3 field and part of the funct7 field. The PC does not require a write control, since it is written once at the end of every clock cycle; the branch control logic determines whether it is written with the incremented PC or the branch target address. Read register 1 Write data Registers ALU Add Zero MemRead MemWrite RegWrite PCSrc MemtoReg Read data 1 Read data 2 Imm Gen Instruction [31-0] ALU result Add Sum Mux Mux Mux ALUSrc Address Data memory Read data Read address Instruction memory PC ALU control ALUOp Instruction [30,14-12] Instruction [19-15] Instruction [11-7] Instruction [24-20] Instruction [31-0] Read register 2 Write register Write data

Chapter 4  The Processor Before we try to write a set of equations or a truth table for the control unit, it will be useful to try to define the control function informally. Because the setting of the control lines depends only on the opcode, we define whether each control signal should be 0, 1, or don’t care (X) for each of the opcode values. Figure 4.22 defines how the control signals should be set for each opcode; this information follows directly from Figures 4.12, 4.20, and 4.21. Operation of the Datapath With the information contained in Figures 4.20 and 4.22, we can design the control unit logic, but before we do that, let’s look at how each instruction uses the datapath. In the next few figures, we show the flow of three different instruction classes through the datapath. The asserted control signals and active datapath elements are highlighted in each of these. Note that a multiplexor whose control is 0 has a definite action, even if its control line is not highlighted. Multiple-bit control signals are highlighted if any constituent signal is asserted. Figure 4.23 shows the operation of the datapath for an R-type instruction, such as add x1, x2, x3. Although everything occurs in one clock cycle, we can think of four steps to execute the instruction; these steps are ordered by the flow of information: 1. The instruction is fetched, and the PC is incremented. 2. Two registers, x2 and x3, are read from the register file; also, the main control unit computes the setting of the control lines during this step. FIGURE 4.20  The effect of each of the six control signals. When the 1-bit control to a two- way multiplexor is asserted, the multiplexor selects the input corresponding to 1. Otherwise, if the control is deasserted, the multiplexor selects the 0 input. Remember that the state elements all have the clock as an implicit input and that the clock is used in controlling writes. Gating the clock externally to a state element can create timing problems. (See Appendix A for further discussion of this problem.)

 4.4  A Simple Implementation Scheme 3. The ALU operates on the data read from the register file, using portions of the opcode to generate the ALU function. 4. The result from the ALU is written into the destination register (x1) in the register file. Similarly, we can illustrate the execution of a load register, such as lw  x1,  offset(x2) in a style similar to Figure 4.23. Figure 4.24 shows the active functional units and asserted control lines for a load. We can think of a load instruction as operating in five steps (similar to how the R-type executed in four): FIGURE 4.21  The simple datapath with the control unit. The input to the control unit is the 7-bit opcode field from the instruction. The outputs of the control unit consist of two 1-bit signals that are used to control multiplexors (ALUSrc and MemtoReg), three signals for controlling reads and writes in the register file and data memory (RegWrite, MemRead, and MemWrite), a 1-bit signal used in determining whether to possibly branch (Branch), and a 2-bit control signal for the ALU (ALUOp). An AND gate is used to combine the branch control signal and the Zero output from the ALU; the AND gate output controls the selection of the next PC. Notice that PCSrc is now a derived signal, rather than one coming directly from the control unit. Thus, we drop the signal name in subsequent figures. Read register 1 Write data Registers ALU Add Zero Read data 1 Read data 2 Instruction [31-0] ALU result Add Sum Mux Mux Mux Address Data memory Read data Read address Instruction memory PC ALU control Instruction [6-0] Branch MemRead MemtoReg ALUOp MemWrite ALUSrc RegWrite Control Read register 2 Write register Write data Imm Gen Instruction [19-15] Instruction [11-7] Instruction [24-20] Instruction [31-0] Instruction [30,14-12]

Chapter 4  The Processor FIGURE 4.22  The setting of the control lines is completely determined by the opcode fields of the instruction. The first row of the table corresponds to the R-format instructions (add, sub, and, and or). For all these instructions, the source register fields are rs1 and rs2, and the destination register field is rd; this defines how the signals ALUSrc is set. Furthermore, an R-type instruction writes a register (RegWrite = 1), but neither reads nor writes data memory. When the Branch control signal is 0, the PC is unconditionally replaced with PC + 4; otherwise, the PC is replaced by the branch target if the Zero output of the ALU is also high. The ALUOp field for R-type instructions is set to 10 to indicate that the ALU control should be generated from the funct fields. The second and third rows of this table give the control signal settings for lw and sw. These ALUSrc and ALUOp fields are set to perform the address calculation. The MemRead and MemWrite are set to perform the memory access. Finally, RegWrite is set for a load to cause the result to be stored in the rd register. The ALUOp field for branch is set for subtract (ALU control = 01), which is used to test for equality. Notice that the MemtoReg field is irrelevant when the RegWrite signal is 0: since the register is not being written, the value of the data on the register data write port is not used. Thus, the entry MemtoReg in the last two rows of the table is replaced with X for don’t care. This type of don’t care must be added by the designer, since it depends on knowledge of how the datapath works. FIGURE 4.23  The datapath in operation for an R-type instruction, such as add x1, x2, x3. The control lines, datapath units, and connections that are active are highlighted. Read register 1 Write data Registers ALU Add Zero Read data 1 Read data 2 Instruction [31–0] ALU result Add Sum Mux Mux Mux Address Data memory Read data Read address Instruction memory PC ALU control Instruction [6–0] Instruction [31–0] Branch MemRead MemtoReg ALUOp MemWrite ALUSrc RegWrite Control Read register 2 Write register Write data Imm Gen Instruction [19–15] Instruction [11–7] Instruction [24–20] Instruction [30,14–12]

 4.4  A Simple Implementation Scheme 1. An instruction is fetched from the instruction memory, and the PC is incremented. 2. A register (x2) value is read from the register file. 3. The ALU computes the sum of the value read from the register file and the sign-extended 12 bits of the instruction (offset). 4. The sum from the ALU is used as the address for the data memory. 5. The data from the memory unit is written into the register file (x1). FIGURE 4.24  The datapath in operation for a load instruction. The control lines, datapath units, and connections that are active are highlighted. A store instruction would operate very similarly. The main difference would be that the memory control would indicate a write rather than a read, the second register value read would be used for the data to store, and the operation of writing the data memory value to the register file would not occur. Read register 1 Write data Registers ALU Add Zero Read data 1 Read data 2 Instruction [31–0] ALU result Add Sum Mux Mux Mux Address Data memory Read data Read address Instruction memory PC ALU control Instruction [6–0] Instruction [31–0] Branch MemRead MemtoReg ALUOp MemWrite ALUSrc RegWrite Control Read register 2 Write register Write data Imm Gen Instruction [19–15] Instruction [11–7] Instruction [24–20] Instruction [30,14-12]

Chapter 4  The Processor Finally, we can show the operation of the branch-if-equal instruction, such as beq x1, x2, offset, in the same fashion. It operates much like an R-format instruction, but the ALU output is used to determine whether the PC is written with PC + 4 or the branch target address. Figure 4.25 shows the four steps in execution: 1. An instruction is fetched from the instruction memory, and the PC is incremented. 2. Two registers, x1 and x2, are read from the register file. FIGURE 4.25  The datapath in operation for a branch-if-equal instruction. The control lines, datapath units, and connections that are active are highlighted. After using the register file and ALU to perform the compare, the Zero output is used to select the next program counter from between the two candidates. Read register 1 Write data Registers ALU Add Zero Read data 1 Read data 2 Instruction [31–0] ALU result Add Sum Mux Mux Mux Address Data memory Read data Read address Instruction memory PC ALU control Instruction [6–0] Instruction [31–0] Branch MemRead MemtoReg ALUOp MemWrite ALUSrc RegWrite Control Read register 2 Write register Write data Imm Gen Instruction [19–15] Instruction [11–7] Instruction [24–20] Instruction [30,14-12]

 4.4  A Simple Implementation Scheme 3. The ALU subtracts one data value from the other data value, both read from the register file. The value of PC is added to the sign-extended, 12 bits of the instruction (offset) left shifted by one; the result is the branch target address. 4. The Zero status information from the ALU is used to decide which adder result to store in the PC. Finalizing Control Now that we have seen how the instructions operate in steps, let’s continue with the control implementation. The control function can be precisely defined using the contents of Figure 4.22. The outputs are the control lines, and the inputs are the opcode bits. Thus, we can create a truth table for each of the outputs based on the binary encoding of the opcodes. Figure 4.26 defines the logic in the control unit as one large truth table that combines all the outputs and that uses the opcode bits as inputs. It completely specifies the control function, and we can implement it directly in gates in an automated fashion. We show this final step in Section C.2 in Appendix C. FIGURE 4.26  The control function for the simple single-cycle implementation is completely specified by this truth table. The top seven rows of the table gives the combinations of input signals that correspond to the four instruction classes, one per column, that determine the control output settings. The bottom portion of the table gives the outputs for each of the four opcodes. Thus, the output RegWrite is asserted for two different combinations of the inputs. If we consider only the four opcodes shown in this table, then we can simplify the truth table by using don’t cares in the input portion. For example, we can detect an R-format instruction with the expression Op4 ∙ Op5, since this is sufficient to distinguish the R-format instructions from lw, sw, and beq. We do not take advantage of this simplification, since the rest of the RISC-V opcodes are used in a full implementation.

Chapter 4  The Processor Why a Single-Cycle Implementation is not Used Today Although the single-cycle design will work correctly, it is too inefficient to be used in modern designs. To see why this is so, notice that the clock cycle must have the same length for every instruction in this single-cycle design. Of course, the longest possible path in the processor determines the clock cycle. This path is most likely a load instruction, which uses five functional units in series: the instruction memory, the register file, the ALU, the data memory, and the register file. Although the CPI is 1 (see Chapter 1), the overall performance of a single-cycle implementation is likely to be poor, since the clock cycle is too long. The penalty for using the single-cycle design with a fixed clock cycle is significant, but might be considered acceptable for this small instruction set. Historically, early computers with very simple instruction sets did use this implementation technique. However, if we tried to implement the floating-point unit or an instruction set with more complex instructions, this single-cycle design wouldn’t work well at all. Because we must assume that the clock cycle is equal to the worst-case delay for all instructions, it’s useless to try implementation techniques that reduce the delay of the common case but do not improve the worst-case cycle time. A single- cycle implementation thus violates the great idea from Chapter 1 of making the common case fast. In Section 4.6, we’ll look at another implementation technique, called pipelining, that uses a datapath very similar to the single-cycle datapath but is much more efficient by having a much higher throughput. Pipelining improves efficiency by executing multiple instructions simultaneously Look at the control signals in Figure 4.26. Can you combine any together? Can any control signal output in the figure be replaced by the inverse of another? (Hint: take into account the don’t cares.) If so, can you use one signal for the other without adding an inverter?. 4.5 A Multicycle Implementation In the prior section, we broke each instruction into a series of steps corresponding to the functional unit operations that were needed. We can use these steps to create a multicycle implementation. In a multicycle implementation, each step in the execution will take 1 clock cycle. The multicycle implementation allows a functional unit to be used more than once per instruction, as long as it is used on different clock cycles. This sharing can help reduce the amount of hardware required. The ability to allow instructions to take different numbers of clock cycles and the ability to share functional units within the execution of a single instruction are the major advantages of a multicycle design. This online section describes the multicycle implementation of MIPS. Although it could reduce hardware costs, almost all chips today use pipelining instead to increase performance over a single cycle implementation, so some readers may want to skip multicycle and go directly to pipelining. However, some Check Yourself

 4.5     A Multicycle Implementation  282.e1 4.6     A Multicycle Implementation Figure e4.5.1 shows the abstract version of the multicycle datapath. If we compare Figure 4.27 to the datapath for the single-cycle version in Figure 4.11 on page 250, we can see the following differences: ■ A single memory unit is used for both instructions and data. ■ There is a single ALU, rather than an ALU and two adders. ■ One or more registers are added after every major functional unit to hold the output of that unit until the value is used in a subsequent clock cycle. At the end of a clock cycle, all data that is used in subsequent clock cycles must be stored in a state element. Data used by subsequent instructions in a later clock cycle is stored into one of the programmer-visible state elements: the register file, the PC, or the memory. In contrast, data used by the same instruction in a later cycle must be stored into one of these additional registers that are appended to each functional unit. Thus, the position of the additional registers is determined by these two factors: what combinational units will fit in one clock cycle and what data is needed in later cycles implementing the instruction. In this multicycle design, we assume that the clock cycle can accommodate at most one of the following operations: a memory access, a register file access (two reads or one write), or an ALU operation. Hence, Data Register # Register # Register # PC Address Instruction or data Memory Registers ALU Instruction register Memory data register ALUOut A B Data FIGURE e4.5.1  The high-level view of the multicycle datapath. This picture shows the key elements of the datapath: a shared memory unit, a single ALU shared among instructions, and the connections among these shared units. The use of shared functional units requires the addition or widening of multiplexors as well as new temporary registers that hold data between clock cycles of the same instruction. The additional registers are the Instruction register (IR), the Memory data register (MDR), A, B, and ALUOut. 4.5

282.e2 4.5     A Multicycle Implementation any data produced by one of these three functional units (the memory, the register file, or the ALU) must be saved into a temporary register for use on a later cycle. If it were not saved, then the possibility of a timing race could occur, leading to the use of an incorrect value. The following temporary registers are added to meet these requirements: ■ The Instruction register (IR) and the Memory data register (MDR) are added to save the output of the memory for an instruction read and a data read, respectively. Two separate registers are used, since, as will be clear shortly, both values are needed during the same clock cycle. ■ The A and B registers are used to hold the register operand values read from the register file. ■ The ALUOut register holds the output of the ALU. All the registers except the IR hold data only between a pair of adjacent clock cycles and will thus not need a write control signal. The IR needs to hold the instruction until the end of execution of that instruction, and thus will require a write control signal. This distinction will become more clear when we show the individual clock cycles for each instruction. Because several functional units are shared for different purposes, we need both to add multiplexors and to expand existing multiplexors. For example, since one memory is used for both instructions and data, we need a multiplexor to select between the two sources for a memory address, namely, the PC (for instruction access) and ALUOut (for data access). Replacing the three ALUs of the single-cycle datapath by a single ALU means that the single ALU must accommodate all the inputs that used to go to the three different ALUs. Handling the additional inputs requires two changes to the datapath: 1. An additional multiplexor is added for the first ALU input. The multiplexor chooses between the A register and the PC. 2. The multiplexor on the second ALU input is changed from a two-way to a three-way multiplexor. The two additional inputs to the multiplexor are the constant 4 (used to increment the PC) and the generated immediate. Figure e4.5.2 shows the details of the datapath with these additional multiplexors. By introducing a few registers and multiplexors, we are able to reduce the number of memory units from two to one and eliminate two adders. Since registers and multiplexors are fairly small compared to a memory unit or ALU, this could yield a substantial reduction in the hardware cost. Because the datapath shown in Figure e4.5.2 takes multiple clock cycles per instruction, it will require a different set of control signals. The programmer- visible state units (the PC, the memory, and the registers) as well as the IR will need write control signals. The memory will also need a read signal. We can use the ALU control unit from the single-cycle datapath (see Appendix B) to control the ALU here as well. Finally, each of the two-input multiplexors requires a single 

 4.5     A Multicycle Implementation  282.e3 control line, while the four-input multiplexor requires two control lines. Figure e4.5.3 shows the datapath of Figure 4.28 with these control lines added. The multicycle datapath still requires additions to support branches and jumps; after these additions, we will see how the instructions are sequenced and then generate the datapath control. With the jump instruction and branch instruction, there are two possible sources for the value to be written into the PC: 1. The output of the ALU, which is the value PC + 4 during instruction fetch. This value should be stored directly into the PC. 2. The register ALUOut, which is where we will store the address of the branch target after it is computed. As we observed when we implemented the single-cycle control, the PC is written both unconditionally and conditionally. During a normal increment and for jumps, the PC is written unconditionally. If the instruction is a conditional branch, the incremented PC is replaced with the value in ALUOut only if the two designated registers are equal. Hence, our implementation uses two separate control signals: PCWrite, which causes an unconditional write of the PC, and PCWriteCond, which causes a write of the PC if the branch condition is also true. Read register 1 Read register 2 Write register Write data Registers ALU Zero Read data 1 Read data 2 Imm Gen Instruction [19–15] Instruction [24–20] Instruction [11–7] ALU result M u x M u x Instruction register PC M u x M u x A B ALUOut Instruction [31–0] Memory data register Address Write data Memory MemData FIGURE e4.5.2  Multicycle datapath for RISC-V handles the basic instructions. Although this datapath supports normal incrementing of the PC, a few more connections and a multiplexor will be needed for branches and jumps; we will add these shortly. The additions versus the single-clock datapath include several registers (IR, MDR, A, B, ALUOut), a multiplexor for the memory address, a multiplexor for the top ALU input, and expanding the multiplexor on the bottom ALU input into a four-way selector. These small additions allow us to remove two adders and a memory unit.

282.e4 4.5     A Multicycle Implementation We need to connect these two control signals to the PC write control. Just as we did in the single-cycle datapath, we will use a few gates to derive the PC write control signal from PCWrite, PCWriteCond, and the Zero signal of the ALU, which is used to detect if the two register operands of a beq are equal. To determine whether the PC should be written during a conditional branch, we AND together the Zero signal of the ALU with the PCWriteCond. The output of this AND gate is then ORed with PCWrite, which is the unconditional PC write signal. The output of this OR gate is connected to the write control signal for the PC. Figure e4.5.4 shows the complete multicycle datapath and control unit, including the additional control signals and multiplexor for implementing the PC updating. Before examining the steps to execute each instruction, let us informally examine the effect of all the control signals (just as we did for the single-cycle design in Figure 5.16 on page 306). Figure e4.5.5 shows what each control signal does when asserted and deasserted. Read register 1 Read register 2 Write register Write data Registers ALU Zero Read data 1 Read data 2 Instruction [19–15] Instruction [24–20] Instruction [11–7] ALU result M u x M u x Instruction register PC M u x M u x A B ALUOut Instruction [31–0] Memory data register Address Write data Memory MemData ALU control Instruction [6-0] ALUOp ALUSrcB MemtoReg IorD MemRead MemWrite IRWrite RegWrite ALUSrcA Imm Gen FIGURE e4.5.3  The multicycle datapath from Figure 4.28 with the control lines shown. The signals ALUOp and ALUSrcB are 2-bit control signals, while all the other control lines are 1-bit signals. Neither register A nor B requires a write signal, since their contents are only read on the cycle immediately after it is written. The memory data register has been added to hold the data from a load when the data returns from memory. Data from a load returning from memory cannot be written directly into the register file since the clock cycle cannot accommodate the time required for both the memory access and the register file write. The MemRead signal has been moved to the top of the memory unit to simplify the figures. The full set of datapaths and control lines for branches will be added shortly.

 4.5     A Multicycle Implementation  282.e5 Elaboration: To reduce the number of signal lines interconnecting the functional units, designers can use shared buses. A shared bus is a set of lines that connect multiple units; in most cases, they include multiple sources that can place data on the bus and multiple readers of the value. Just as we reduced the number of functional units for the datapath, we can reduce the number of buses interconnecting these units by sharing the buses. For example, there are six sources coming to the ALU; however, only two of them are needed at any one time. Thus, a pair of buses can be used to hold values that are being sent to the ALU. Rather than placing a large multiplexor in front of the ALU, a designer can use a shared bus and then ensure that only one of the sources is driving the bus at any point. Although this saves signal lines, the same number of control lines Read register 1 Read register 2 Write register Write data Registers ALU Zero Read data 1 Read data 2 Imm Gen Instruction [6–0] Instruction [19–15] Instruction [24–20] Instruction [11–7] ALU result M u x M u x Instruction register PC M u x M u x A B M u x ALUOut Instruction [31–0] Memory data register Address Write data Memory MemData PCWriteCond PCWrite IorD MemRead MemWrite MemtoReg IRWrite PCSource ALUOp ALUSrcB ALUSrcA RegWrite Outputs Control Op [6–0] ALU control Instruction [6-0] FIGURE e4.5.4  The complete datapath for the multicycle implementation together with the necessary control lines. The control lines of Figure e4.5.3 are attached to the control unit, and the control and datapath elements needed to effect changes to the PC are included. The major additions from Figure 4.29 include the multiplexor used to select the source of a new PC value; gates used to combine the PC write signals; and the control signals PCSource, PCWrite, and PCWriteCond. The PCWriteCond signal is used to decide whether a conditional branch should be taken.

282.e6 4.5     A Multicycle Implementation will be needed to control what goes on the bus. The major drawback to using such bus structures is a potential performance penalty, since a bus is unlikely to be as fast as a point-to-point connection. Breaking the Instruction Execution into Clock Cycles Given the datapath in Figure e4.5.4, we now need to look at what should happen in each clock cycle of the multicycle execution, since this will determine what additional control signals may be needed, as well as the setting of the control signals. Our goal in breaking the execution into clock cycles should be to maximize performance. We can begin by breaking the execution of any instruction into a series of steps, each taking one clock cycle, attempting to keep the amount of work per cycle roughly equal. For example, we will restrict each step to contain Actions of the 1-bit control signals Signal name Effect when deasserted Effect when asserted The general-purpose register selected by the Write register number is None. RegWrite written with the value of the Write data input. ALUSrcA The first ALU operand is the PC. The first ALU operand comes from the A register. Content of memory at the location specified by the Address input is put None. MemRead on Memory data output. Memory contents at the location specified by the Address input is None. MemWrite replaced by the value on the Write data input. MemtoReg The value fed to the register file Write data input comes from ALUOut. The value fed to the register file Write data input comes from the MDR. IorD The PC is used to supply the address to the memory unit. ALUOut is used to supply the address to the memory unit. The output of the memory is written into the IR. None. IRWrite The PC is written; the source is controlled by PCSource. None. PCWrite The PC is written if the Zero output from the ALU is also active. None. PCWriteCond Actions of the 2-bit control signals Signal name Value (binary) Effect ALUOp The ALU performs an add operation. The ALU performs a subtract operation. The funct field of the instruction determines the ALU operation. ALUSrcB The second input to the ALU comes from the B register. The second input to the ALU is the constant 4. The second input to the ALU is the immediate generated from the IR. PCSource Output of the ALU (PC + 4) is sent to the PC for writing. The contents of ALUOut (the branch target address) are sent to the PC for writing. The jump target address (IR[25:0] shifted left 2 bits and concatenated with PC + 4[31:28]) is sent to the PC for writing. FIGURE e4.5.5  The action caused by the setting of each control signal in Figure e4.5.4 on page 323. The top table describes the 1-bit control signals, while the bottom table describes the 2-bit signals. Only those control lines that affect multiplexors have an action when they are deasserted. This information is similar to that in Figure 5.16 on page 306 for the single-cycle datapath, but adds several new control lines (IRWrite, PCWrite, PCWriteCond, ALUSrcB, and PCSource) and removes control lines that are no longer used or have been replaced (PCSrc and Branch).

 4.5     A Multicycle Implementation  282.e7 at most one ALU operation, or one register file access, or one memory access. With this restriction, the clock cycle could be as short as the longest of these operations. Recall that at the end of every clock cycle any data values that will be needed on a subsequent cycle must be stored into a register, which can be either one of the major state elements (e.g., the PC, the register file, or the memory), a temporary register written on every clock cycle (e.g., A, B, MDR, or ALUOut), or a temporary register with write control (e.g., IR). Also remember that because our design is edge-triggered, we can continue to read the current value of a register; the new value does not appear until the next clock cycle. In the single-cycle datapath, each instruction uses a set of datapath elements to carry out its execution. Many of the datapath elements operate in series, using the output of another element as an input. Some datapath elements operate in parallel; for example, the PC is incremented and the instruction is read at the same time. A similar situation exists in the multicycle datapath. All the operations listed in one step occur in parallel within 1 clock cycle, while successive steps operate in series in different clock cycles. The limitation of one ALU operation, one memory access, and one register file access determines what can fit in one step. Notice that we distinguish between reading from or writing into the PC or one of the stand-alone registers and reading from or writing into the register file. In the former case, the read or write is part of a clock cycle, while reading or writing a result into the register file takes an additional clock cycle. The reason for this distinction is that the register file has additional control and access overhead compared to the single stand-alone registers. Thus, keeping the clock cycle short motivates dedicating separate clock cycles for register file accesses. The potential execution steps and their actions are given below. Each RISC-V instruction needs from three to five of these steps: 1. Instruction fetch step Fetch the instruction from memory and compute the address of the next sequential instruction: IR <= Memory[PC]; PC <= PC + 4; Operation: Send the PC to the memory as the address, perform a read, and write the instruction into the Instruction register (IR), where it will be stored. Also, increment the PC by 4. We use the symbol “<=” from Verilog; it indicates that alright-hand sides are evaluated and then all assignments are made, which is effectively how the hardware executes during the clock cycle. To implement this step, we will need to assert the control signals MemRead and IRWrite, and set IorD to 0 to select the PC as the source of the address. We also increment the PC by 4, which requires setting the ALUSrcA signal to 0 

282.e8 4.5     A Multicycle Implementation (sending the PC to the ALU), the ALUSrcB signal to 01 (sending 4 to the ALU), and ALUOp to 00 (to make the ALU add). Finally, we will also want to store the incremented instruction address back into the PC, which requires setting PC source to 0 and setting PCWrite. The increment of the PC and the instruction memory access can occur in parallel. The new value of the PC is not visible until the next clock cycle. (The incremented PC will also be stored into ALUOut, but this action is benign.) 2. Instruction decode and register fetch step In the previous step and in this one, we do not yet know what the instruction is, so we can perform only actions that are either applicable to all instructions (such as fetching the instruction in step 1) or not harmful, in case the instruction isn’t what we think it might be. Thus, in this step we can read the two registers indicated by the rs1 and rs2 instruction fields, since it isn’t harmful to read them even if it isn’t necessary. The values read from the register file may be needed in later stages, so we read them from the register file and store the values into the temporary registers A and B. We will also compute the branch target address with the ALU, which also is not harmful because we can ignore the value if the instruction turns out not to be a branch. The potential branch target is saved in ALUOut. Performing these “optimistic” actions early has the benefit of decreasing the number of clock cycles needed to execute an instruction. We can do these optimistic actions early because of the regularity of the instruction formats. For instance, if the instruction has two register inputs, they are always in the rs1 and rs2 fields: A <= Reg[IR[19:15]]; B <= Reg[IR[24:20]]; ALUOut <= PC + immediate; Operation: Access the register file to read registers rs1 and rs2 and store the results into registers A and B. Since A and B are overwritten on every cycle, the register file can be read on every cycle with the values stored into A and B. This step also computes the branch target address and stores the address in ALUOut, where it will be used on the next clock cycle if the instruction is a branch. This requires setting ALUSrcA to 0 (so that the PC is sent to the ALU), ALUSrcB to the value 10 (so that the immediate is sent to the ALU), and ALUOp to 00 (so the ALU adds). The register file accesses and computation of branch target occur in parallel. After this clock cycle, determining the action to take can depend on the instruction contents. 3. Execution, memory address computation, or branch completion This is the first cycle during which the datapath operation is determined by the instruction class. In all cases, the ALU is operating on the operands prepared in the previous step, performing one of four functions, depending 

 4.5     A Multicycle Implementation  282.e9 on the instruction class. We specify the action to be taken depending on the instruction class. Memory reference: immediate Operation: The ALU is adding the operands to form the memory address. This requires setting ALUSrcA to 1 (so that the first ALU input is register A) and setting ALUSrcB to 10 (so that the output of the immediate generation unit is used for the second ALU input). The ALUOp signals will need to be set to 00 (causing the ALU to add). Arithmetic-logical instruction (R-type): ALUOut <= A op B; Operation: The ALU is performing the operation specified by the opcode on the two values read from the register file in the previous cycle. This requires setting ALUSrcA = 1 and setting ALUSrcB = 00, which together cause the registers A and B to be used as the ALU inputs. The ALUOp signals will need to be set to 10 (so that the opcode is used to determine the ALU control signal settings). Branch: if (A == B) PC <= ALUOut; Operation: The ALU is used to do the equal comparison between the two registers read in the previous step. The Zero signal out of the ALU is used to determine whether or not to branch. This requires setting ALUSrcA = 1 and setting ALUSrcB = 00 (so that the register file outputs are the ALU inputs). The ALUOp signals will need to be set to 01 (causing the ALU to subtract) for equality testing. The PCWriteCond signal will need to be asserted to update the PC if the Zero output of the ALU is asserted. By setting PCSource to 1, the value written into the PC will come from ALUOut, which holds the branch target address computed in the previous cycle. For conditional branches that are taken, we actually write the PC twice: once from the output of the ALU (during the Instruction decode/register fetch) and once from ALUOut (during the Branch completion step). The last value written into the PC is the one used for the next instruction fetch. 4. Memory access or R-type instruction completion step During this step, a load or store instruction accesses memory and an arithmetic­ logical instruction writes its result. When a value is retrieved from memory, it is stored into the memory data register (MDR), where it must be used on the next clock cycle.

282.e10 4.5     A Multicycle Implementation Memory reference: MDR <= Memory [ALUOut]; or Memory [ALUOut] <= B; Operation: If the instruction is a load, a data word is retrieved from memory and is written into the MDR. If the instruction is a store, then the data is written into memory. In either case, the address used is the one computed during the previous step and stored in ALUOut. For a store, the source operand is saved in B. (B is actually read twice, once in step 2 and once in step 3. Luckily, the same value is read both times, since the register number—which is stored in IR and used to read from the register file—does not change.) The signal MemRead (for a load) or MemWrite (for a store) will need to be asserted. In addition, for loads and stores, the signal IorD is set to 1 to force the memory address to come from the ALU, rather than the PC. Since MDR is written on every clock cycle, no explicit control signal need be asserted. Arithmetic-logical instruction (R-type): Reg[IR[11:7]] <= ALUOut; Operation: Place the contents of ALUOut, which corresponds to the output of the ALU operation in the previous cycle, into the Result register. The signal RegDst must be set to 1 to force the rd field (bits 11:7) to be used to select the register file entry to write. RegWrite must be asserted, and MemtoReg must be set to 0 so that the output of the ALU is written, as opposed to the memory data output. 5. Memory read completion step During this step, loads complete by writing back the value from memory. Load: Reg[IR[11:7]] <= MDR; Operation: Write the load data, which was stored into MDR in the previous cycle, into the register file. To do this, we set MemtoReg = 1 (to write the result from memory), and assert RegWrite (to cause a write). This five-step sequence is summarized in Figure e4.5.6. From this sequence we can determine what the control must do on each clock cycle.

 4.5     A Multicycle Implementation  282.e11 Defining the Control Now that we have determined what the control signals are and when they must be asserted, we can implement the control unit. To design the control unit for the single- cycle datapath, we used a set of truth tables that specified the setting of the control signals based on the instruction class. For the multicycle datapath, the control is more complex because the instruction is executed in a series of steps. The control for the multicycle datapath must specify both the signals to be set in any step and the next step in the sequence. Section 4.14 shows how hardware design languages are used to design modern processors with examples of both the multicycle datapath and the finite- state control. In modern digital systems design, the final step of taking a hardware description to actual gates is handled by logic and datapath synthesis tools. Appendix C shows how this process operates by translating the multicycle control unit to a detailed hardware implementation. The key ideas of control can be grasped from this chapter without examining the material on hardware description languages or Appendix C. However, if you want to actually do some hardware design, Appendix B can show you what the implementations are likely to look like at the gate level. Step name Action for R-type instructions Action for memory reference instructions Action for branches IR <= Memory[PC] Instruction fetch PC <= PC + 4 A<= Reg [IR[19:15]] Instruction decode/register fetch B <= Reg [IR[24:20]] ALUOut <= PC + immediate Execution, address computation, branch/jump completion ALUOut <= A op B ALUOut <= A + immediate if (A == B) PC <= ALUOut Memory access or R-type completion Reg [IR[11:7]] <= ALUOut Load: MDR <= Memory[ALUOut] or Store: Memory [ALUOut] <= B Load: Reg[IR[11:7]] <= MDR Memory read completion FIGURE e4.5.6  Summary of the steps taken to execute any instruction class. Instructions take from three to five execution steps. The first two steps are independent of the instruction class. After these steps, an instruction takes from one to three more cycles to complete, depending on the instruction class. The empty entries for the Memory access step or the Memory read completion step indicate that the particular instruction class takes fewer cycles. In a multicycle implementation, a new instruction will be started as soon as the current instruction completes, so these cycles are not idle or wasted. As mentioned earlier, the register file actually reads every cycle, but as long as the IR does not change, the values read from the register file are identical. In particular, the value read into register B during the Instruction decode stage, for a branch or R-type instruction, is the same as the value stored into B during the Execution stage and then used in the Memory access stage for a store word instruction.

282.e12 4.5     A Multicycle Implementation CPI in a Multicycle CPU Using the SPECINT2006 instruction mix shown in Figure 3.24, what is the CPI, assuming that each state in the multicycle CPU requires 1 clock cycle? The mix is 20% loads, 8% stores, 10% branches, and 62% ALU (all the rest of the mix, which we assume to be ALU instructions). From Figure 5.30 on page 329, the number of clock cycles for each instruction class is the following: ■ Loads: 5 ■ Stores: 4 ■ ALU instructions: 4 ■ Branches: 3 The CPI is given by the following: is simply the instruction frequency for the instruction class i. We can therefore substitute to obtain CPI = 0.20 × 5 + 0.08 × 4 + 0.62 × 4 + 0.10 × 3 = 4.10 This CPI is better than the worst-case CPI of 5.0 when all the instructions take the same number of clock cycles. Of course, overheads in both designs may reduce or increase this difference. The multicycle design is probably also more cost-effective, since it uses fewer separate components in the datapath. The method we use to specify the multicycle control is a finite-state machine. A finite-state machine consists of a set of states and directions on how to change states. The directions are defined by a next-state function, which maps the current EXAMPLE ANSWER The ratio CPI CPU clock cycles Instruction count -------------------------------------------- Instruction count ∑ i CPIi × Instruction count ------------------------------------------------------------------- = = Instruction counti Instruction count ------------------------------------------- CPIi × ∑ = Instruction counti Instruction count --------------------------------------------------------

 4.5     A Multicycle Implementation  282.e13 state and the inputs to a new state. When we use a finite-state machine for control, each state also specifies a set of outputs that are asserted when the machine is in that state. The implementation of a finite-state machine usually assumes that all outputs that are not explicitly asserted are deasserted. Similarly, the correct operation of the datapath depends on the fact that a signal that is not explicitly asserted is deasserted, rather than acting as a don’t care. For example, the RegWrite signal should be asserted only when a register file entry is to be written; when it is not explicitly asserted, it must be deasserted. Multiplexor controls are slightly different, since they select one of the inputs whether they are 0 or 1. Thus, in the finite-state machine, we always specify the setting of all the multiplexor controls that we care about. When we implement the finite-state machine with logic, setting a control to 0 may be the default and thus may not require any gates. A simple example of a finite-state machine appears in Appendix B, and if you are unfamiliar with the concept of a finite-state machine, you may want to examine Appendix B before proceeding. The finite-state control essentially corresponds to the five steps of execution shown on pages 325 through 329; each state in the finite-state machine will take 1 clock cycle. The finite-state machine will consist of several parts. Since the first two steps of execution are identical for every instruction, the initial two states of the finite-state machine will be common for all instructions. Steps 3 through 5 differ, depending on the opcode. After the execution of the last step for a particular instruction class, the finite-state machine will return to the initial state to begin fetching the next instruction. Figure e4.5.7 shows this abstracted representation of the finite-state machine. To fill in the details of the finite-state machine, we will first expand the instruction fetch and decode portion, and then we will show the states (and actions) for the different instruction classes. We show the first two states of the finite-state machine in Figure e4.5.8 using a traditional graphic representation. We number the states to simplify the explanation, though the numbers are arbitrary. State 0, corresponding to step 1, is the starting state of the machine. The signals that are asserted in each state are shown within the circle representing the state. The arcs between states define the next state and are labeled with conditions that select a specific next state when multiple next states are possible. After state 1, the signals asserted depend on the class of instruction. Thus, the finite-state machine has four arcs exiting state 1, corresponding to the four instruction classes: memory reference, R-type, branch on equal, and jump. This process of branching to different states depending on the instruction is called decoding, since the choice of the next state, and hence the actions that follow, depend on the instruction class. Figure e4.5.9 shows the portion of the finite-state machine needed to implement the memory reference instructions. For the memory reference instructions, the first state after fetching the instruction and registers computes the memory address (state 2). To compute the memory address, the ALU input multiplexors next-state function  A combinational function that, given the inputs and the current state, determines the next state of a finite-state machine. finite-state machine  A sequential logic function consisting of a set of inputs and outputs, a nextstate function that maps the current state and the inputs to a new state, and an output function that maps the current state and possibly the inputs to a set of asserted outputs.

282.e14 4.5     A Multicycle Implementation Start Memory access instructions (Figure e4.5.9) R-type instructions (Figure e4.5.10) Branch instruction (Figure e4.5.11) Instruction fetch/decode and register fetch (Figure e4.5.8) FIGURE e4.5.7  The high-level view of the finite-state machine control. The first steps are independent of the instruction class; then a series of sequences that depend on the instruction opcode are used to complete each instruction class. After completing the actions needed for that instruction class, the control returns to fetch a new instruction. Each box in this figure may represent one to several states. The arc labeled Start marks the state in which to begin when the first instruction is to be fetched. MemRead ALUSrcA = 0 IorD = 0 IRWrite ALUSrcB = 01 ALUOp = 00 PCWrite PCSource = 0 ALUSrcA = 0 ALUSrcB = 10 ALUOp = 00 Memory reference FSM (Figure e4.5.9) R-type FSM (Figure e4.5.10) Branch FSM (Figure 4.37) Instruction decode/ Register fetch Instruction fetch Start (Op = 'LW') or (Op = 'SW') (Op = R-type) (Op = 'BEQ') FIGURE e4.5.8  The instruction fetch and decode portion of every instruction is identical. These states correspond to the top box in the abstract finite-state machine in Figure 4.33. In the first state we assert two signals to cause the memory to read an instruction and write it into the Instruction register (MemRead and IRWrite), and we set IorD to 0 to choose the PC as the address source. The signals ALUSrcA, ALUSrcB, ALUOp, PCWrite, and PCSource are set to compute PC + 4 and store it into the PC. (It will also be stored into ALUOut, but never used from there.) In the next state, we compute the branch target address by setting ALUSrcB to 11 (causing the shifted and sign-extended lower 16 bits of the IR to be sent to the ALU), setting ALUSrcA to 0 and ALUOp to 00; we store the result in the ALUOut register, which is written on every cycle. There are four next states that depend on the class of the instruction, which is known during this state. The control unit input, called Op, is used to determine which of these arcs to follow. Remember that all signals not explicitly asserted are deasserted; this is particularly important for signals that control writes. For multiplexor controls, lack of a specific setting indicates that we do not care about the setting of the multiplexor.

 4.5     A Multicycle Implementation  282.e15 must be set so that the first input is the A register, while the second input is the sign-extended displacement field; the result is written into the ALUOut register. After the memory address calculation, the memory should be read or written; this requires two different states. If the instruction opcode is lw, then state 3 (corresponding to the step Memory access) does the memory read (MemRead is asserted). The output of the memory is always written into MDR. If it is sw, state 5 does a memory write (MemWrite is asserted). In states 3 and 5, the signal IorD is set to 1 to force the memory address to come from the ALU. After performing a write, the instruction sw has completed execution, and the next state is state 0. If the instruction is a load, however, another state (state 4) is needed to write the ALUSrcA = 1 ALUSrcB = 10 ALUOp = 00 From state 1 (Op = 'LW') or (Op = 'SW') Memory address computation Memory access MemRead IorD = 1 MemWrite IorD = 1 RegWrite MemtoReg =1 RegDst = 0 Memory read completion step To state 0 (Figure e4.5.8) Memory access (Op = 'SW') (Op = 'LW') FIGURE e4.5.9  The finite-state machine for controlling memory reference instructions has four states. These states correspond to the box labeled “Memory access instructions” in Figure e4.5.7. After performing a memory address calculation, a separate sequence is needed for load and for store. The setting of the control signals ALUSrcA, ALUSrcB, and ALUOp is used to cause the memory address computation in state 2. Loads require an extra state to write the result from the MDR (where the result is written in state 3) into the register file.

282.e16 4.5     A Multicycle Implementation result from the memory into the register file. Setting the multiplexor controls MemtoReg = 1 and RegDst = 0 will send the loaded value in the MDR to be written into the register file. After this state, corresponding to the Memory read completion step, the next state is state 0. To implement the R-type instructions requires two states corresponding to steps 3 (Execute) and 4 (R-type completion). Figure e4.5.10 shows this two- state portion of the finite-state machine. State 6 asserts ALUSrcA and sets the ALUSrcB signals to 00; this forces the two registers that were read from the register file to be used as inputs to the ALU. Setting ALUOp to 10 causes the ALU control unit to use the function field to set the ALU control signals. In state 7, RegWrite is asserted to cause the register file to write, RegDst is asserted to cause the rd field to be used as the register number of the destination, and MemtoReg is deasserted to select ALUOut as the source of the value to write into the register file. For branches, only a single additional state is necessary because they complete execution during the third step of instruction execution. During this state, the ALUSrcA = 1 ALUSrcB = 00 ALUOp = 10 From state 1 (Op = R-type) Execution RegDst =1 RegWrite MemtoReg = 0 To state 0 (Figure e4.5.8) R-type completion FIGURE e4.5.10  R-type instructions can be implemented with a simple two-state finitestate machine. These states correspond to the box labeled “R-type instructions” in Figure e4.5.7. The first state causes the ALU operation to occur, while the second state causes the ALU result (which is in ALUOut) to be written in the register file. The three signals asserted during state 7 cause the contents of ALUOut to be written into the register file in the entry specified by the rd field of the Instruction register.

 4.5     A Multicycle Implementation  282.e17 ALUSrcA = 1 ALUSrcB = 00 ALUOp = 01 PCWriteCond PCSource = 1 From state 1 (Op = "BEQ") Branch completion To state 0 (Figure e4.5.8) FIGURE e4.5.11  The branch instruction requires a single state. The first three outputs that are asserted cause the ALU to compare the registers (ALUSrcA, ALUSrcB, and ALUOp), while the signals PCSource and PCWriteCond perform the conditional write if the branch condition is true. Notice that we do not use the value written into ALUOut; instead, we use only the Zero output of the ALU. The branch target address is read from ALUOut, where it was saved at the end of state 1. control signals that cause the ALU to compare the contents of registers A and B must be set, and the signals that cause the PC to be written conditionally with the address in the ALUOut register are also set. To perform the comparison requires that we assert ALUSrcA and set ALUSrcB to 00, and set the ALUOp value to 01 (forcing a subtract). (We use only the Zero output of the ALU, not the result of the subtraction.) To control the writing of the PC, we assert PCWriteCond and set PCSource = 01, which will cause the value in the ALUOut register (containing the branch address calculated in state 1, Figure e4.5.8 on page 333) to be written into the PC if the Zero bit out of the ALU is asserted. Figure e4.5.11 shows this single state. We can now put these pieces of the finite-state machine together to form a specification for the control unit, as shown in Figure e4.5.12. In each state, the signals that are asserted are shown. The next state depends on the opcode bits of the instruction, so we label the arcs with a comparison for the corresponding instruction opcodes. A finite-state machine can be implemented with a temporary register that holds the current state and a block of combinational logic that determines both the datapath signals to be asserted and the next state. Figure 4.39 shows how such an implementation might look. Appendix B describes in detail how the finite-state machine is implemented using this structure. In Section B.3, the combinational control logic for the finite-state machine of Figure e4.5.12 is implemented both with a ROM (read-only memory) and a PLA (programmable logic array). (Also see Appendix A for a description of these logic elements.) In the next section of this chapter, we consider another way to represent control. Both of these techniques are simply different representations of the same control information.

282.e18 4.5     A Multicycle Implementation FIGURE e4.5.12  The complete finite-state machine control for the datapath shown in Figure e4.5.4. The labels on the arcs are conditions that are tested to determine which state is the next state; when the next state is unconditional, no label is given. The labels inside the nodes indicate the output signals asserted during that state; we always specify the setting of a multiplexor control signal if the correct operation requires it. Hence, in some states a multiplexor control will be set to 0. MemRead ALUSrcA = 0 IorD = 0 IRWrite ALUSrcB = 01 ALUOp = 00 PCWrite PCSource = 0 ALUSrcA = 0 ALUSrcB = 10 ALUOp = 00 ALUSrcA = 1 ALUSrcB = 00 ALUOp = 10 ALUSrcA = 1 ALUSrcB = 10 ALUOp = 00 MemRead IorD = 1 MemWrite IorD = 1 RegDst = 1 RegWrite MemtoReg = 0 RegDst = 0 RegWrite MemtoReg = 1 ALUSrcA = 1 ALUSrcB = 00 ALUOp = 01 PCWriteCond PCSource = 1 Instruction decode/ register fetch Instruction fetch Start (Op = 'LW') or (Op = 'SW') (Op = R-type) (Op = 'BEQ') Memory read completion step R-type completion Memory access Memory access Execution Branch completion Memory address computation (Op = 'SW') (Op = 'LW')

 4.5     A Multicycle Implementation  282.e19 Pipelining, which is the subject of the next section, is almost always used to accelerate the execution of instructions. For simple instructions, pipelining is capable of achieving the higher clock rate of a multicycle design and a single- cycle CPI of a single-clock design. In most pipelined processors, however, some instructions take longer than a single cycle and require multicycle control. Floating-point instructions are one universal example. There are many examples in the IA-32 architecture that require the use of multicycle control. Elaboration: The style of finite-state machine in Figure 4.39 is called a Moore machine, after Edward Moore. Its identifying characteristic is that the output depends only on the current state. For a Moore machine, the box labeled Combinational control logic can be split into two pieces. One piece has the control output and only the state input, while the other has only the next-state output. An alternative style of machine is a Mealy machine, named after George Mealy. The Mealy machine allows both the input and the current state to be used to determine the output. Moore machines have potential implementation advantages in speed and size of the control unit. The speed Combinational control logic Outputs Inputs State register Next state Datapath control outputs Inputs from instruction register opcode field FIGURE e4.5.13  Finite-state machine controllers are typically implemented using a block of combinational logic and a register to hold the current state. The outputs of the combinational logic are the next-state number and the control signals to be asserted for the current state. The inputs to the combinational logic are the current state and any inputs used to determine the next state. In this case, the inputs are the instruction register opcode bits. Notice that in the finite-state machine used in this chapter, the outputs depend only on the current state, not on the inputs. The elaboration below explains this in more detail..

282.e20 4.5     A Multicycle Implementation Check Yourself For a processor with a given clock rate, the relative performance between two code segments will be determined by the product of the CPI and the instruction count to execute each segment. As we have seen here, instructions can vary in their CPI, even for a simple processor. In the next two chapters, we will see that the introduction of pipelining and the use of caches create even larger opportunities for variation in the CPI. Although many factors that affect the CPI are controlled by the hardware designer, the programmer, the compiler, and software system dictate what instructions are executed, and it is this process that determines what the effective CPI for the program will be. Programmers seeking to improve performance must understand the role of CPI and the factors that affect it. True, false, or maybe: The control signal PCWriteCond can be replaced by PCSource. Understanding Program Performance advantages arise because the control outputs, which are needed early in the clock cycle, do not depend on the inputs, but only on the current state. In Appendix C, when the implementation of this finite-state machine is taken down to logic gates, the size advantage can be clearly seen.The potential disadvantage of a Moore machine is that it may require additional states. For example, in situations where there is a one-state difference between two sequences of states, the Mealy machine may unify the states by making the outputs depend on the inputs.

 4.6  An Overview of Pipelining Never waste time. American proverb instructors see pedagogic advantages to explaining multicycle implementation before pipelining, so we off er this implementation option online. 4.6 An Overview of Pipelining Pipelining is an implementation technique in which multiple instructions are overlapped in execution. Today, pipelining is nearly universal. This section relies heavily on one analogy to give an overview of the pipelining terms and issues. If you are interested in just the big picture, you should concentrate on this section and then skip to Sections 4.11 and 4.12 to see an introduction to the advanced pipelining techniques used in recent processors such as the Intel Core i7 and ARM Cortex-A53. If you are curious about exploring the anatomy of a pipelined computer, this section is a good introduction to Sections 4.7 through 4.10. Anyone who has done a lot of laundry has intuitively used pipelining. The non- pipelined approach to laundry would be as follows: 1. Place one dirty load of clothes in the washer. 2. When the washer is finished, place the wet load in the dryer. 3. When the dryer is finished, place the dry load on a table and fold. 4. When folding is finished, ask your roommate to put the clothes away. When this load is done, start over with the next dirty load. The pipelined approach takes much less time, as Figure 4.27 shows. As soon as the washer is finished with the first load and placed in the dryer, you load the washer with the second dirty load. When the first load is dry, you place it on the table to start folding, move the wet load to the dryer, and put the next dirty load into the washer. Next, you have your roommate put the first load away, you start folding the second load, the dryer has the third load, and you put the fourth load into the washer. At this point all steps—called stages in pipelining—are operating concurrently. As long as we have separate resources for each stage, we can pipeline the tasks. The pipelining paradox is that the time from placing a single dirty sock in the washer until it is dried, folded, and put away is not shorter for pipelining; the reason pipelining is faster for many loads is that everything is working in parallel, so more loads are finished per hour. Pipelining improves throughput of our laundry system. Hence, pipelining would not decrease the time to complete one load of laundry, but when we have many loads of laundry to do, the improvement in throughput decreases the total time to complete the work. If all the stages take about the same amount of time and there is enough work to do, then the speed-up due to pipelining is equal to the number of stages in the pipeline, in this case four: washing, drying, folding, and putting away. Therefore, pipelined laundry is potentially four times faster than nonpipelined: 20 loads would take about five times as long as one load, while 20 loads of sequential laundry takes 20 times as long as one load. It’s only 2.3 times faster in Figure 4.27, because we pipelining  An implementation technique in which multiple instructions are overlapped in execution, much like an assembly line.

Chapter 4  The Processor FIGURE 4.27  The laundry analogy for pipelining. Ann, Brian, Cathy, and Don each have dirty clothes to be washed, dried, folded, and put away. The washer, dryer, “folder,” and “storer” each take 30 minutes for their task. Sequential laundry takes 8 hours for four loads of washing, while pipelined laundry takes just 3.5 hours. We show the pipeline stage of different loads over time by showing copies of the four resources on this two-dimensional time line, but we really have just one of each resource. Time Task order A B C D 6 PM 2 AM Time Task order A B C D 6 PM 2 AM only show four loads. Notice that at the beginning and end of the workload in the pipelined version in Figure 4.27, the pipeline is not completely full; this start-up and wind-down affects performance when the number of tasks is not large compared to the number of stages in the pipeline. If the number of loads is much larger than four, then the stages will be full most of the time and the increase in throughput will be very close to four. The same principles apply to processors where we pipeline instruction execution. RISC-V instructions classically take five steps: 1. Fetch instruction from memory. 2. Read registers and decode the instruction. 3. Execute the operation or calculate an address. 4. Access an operand in data memory (if necessary). 5. Write the result into a register (if necessary).

 4.6  An Overview of Pipelining ANSWER EXAMPLE Hence, the RISC-V pipeline we explore in this chapter has five stages. The following example shows that pipelining speeds up instruction execution just as it speeds up the laundry. Single-Cycle versus Pipelined Performance To make this discussion concrete, let’s create a pipeline. In this example, and in the rest of this chapter, we limit our attention to seven instructions: load word (lw), store word (sw), add (add), subtract (sub), AND (and), OR (or), and branch if equal (beq). Contrast the average time between instructions of a single-cycle implementation, in which all instructions take one clock cycle, to a pipelined implementation. Assume that the operation times for the major functional units in this example are 200 ps for memory access for instructions or data, 200 ps for ALU operation, and 100 ps for register file read or write. In the single-cycle model, every instruction takes exactly one clock cycle, so the clock cycle must be stretched to accommodate the slowest instruction. Figure 4.28 shows the time required for each of the seven instructions. The single-cycle design must allow for the slowest instruction—in Figure 4.28 it is lw—so the time required for every instruction is 800 ps. Similarly to Figure 4.27, Figure 4.29 compares nonpipelined and pipelined execution of three load register instructions. Thus, the time between the first and fourth instructions in the nonpipelined design is 3 × 800 ps or 2400 ps. All the pipeline stages take a single clock cycle, so the clock cycle must be long enough to accommodate the slowest operation. Just as the single-cycle design must take the worst-case clock cycle of 800 ps, even though some instructions can be as fast as 500 ps, the pipelined execution clock cycle must have the worst-case clock cycle of 200 ps, even though some stages take only 100 ps. Pipelining still offers a fourfold performance improvement: the time between the first and fourth instructions is 3 × 200 ps or 600 ps. FIGURE 4.28  Total time for each instruction calculated from the time for each component. This calculation assumes that the multiplexors, control unit, PC accesses, and sign extension unit have no delay.

Chapter 4  The Processor We can turn the pipelining speed-up discussion above into a formula. If the stages are perfectly balanced, then the time between instructions on the pipelined processor—assuming ideal conditions—is equal to Timebetweeninstructions Timebetweeninstructions pipelined no = npipelined Number of pipestages Under ideal conditions and with a large number of instructions, the speed-up from pipelining is approximately equal to the number of pipe stages; a five-stage pipeline is nearly five times faster. The formula suggests that a five-stage pipeline should offer nearly a fivefold improvement over the 800 ps nonpipelined time, or a 160 ps clock cycle. The example shows, however, that the stages may be imperfectly balanced. Moreover, pipelining involves some overhead, the source of which will be clearer shortly. FIGURE 4.29  Single-cycle, nonpipelined execution (top) versus pipelined execution (bottom). Both use the same hardware components, whose time is listed in Figure 4.28. In this case, we see a fourfold speed-up on average time between instructions, from 800 ps down to 200 ps. Compare this figure to Figure 4.27. For the laundry, we assumed all stages were equal. If the dryer were slowest, then the dryer stage would set the stage time. The pipeline stage times of a computer are also limited by the slowest resource, either the ALU operation or the memory access. We assume the write to the register file occurs in the first half of the clock cycle and the read from the register file occurs in the second half. We use this assumption throughout this chapter. Program execution order (in instructions) lw x1, 100(x4) lw x2, 200(x4) lw x3, 400(x4) Time Instruction fetch Data access Reg Instruction fetch Data access Reg Instruction fetch 800 ps 800 ps 800 ps Program execution order (in instructions) lw x1, 100(x4) lw x2, 200(x4) lw x3, 400(x4) Time Instruction fetch Data access Reg Instruction fetch Instruction fetch Data access Reg Data access Reg 200 ps 200 ps 200 ps 200 ps 200 ps 200 ps 200 ps ALU Reg ALU Reg ALU ALU ALU Reg Reg Reg

 4.6  An Overview of Pipelining Thus, the time per instruction in the pipelined processor will exceed the minimum possible, and speed-up will be less than the number of pipeline stages. However, even our claim of fourfold improvement for our example is not reflected in the total execution time for the three instructions: it’s 1400 ps versus 2400 ps. Of course, this is because the number of instructions is not large. What would happen if we increased the number of instructions? We could extend the previous figures to 1,000,003 instructions. We would add 1,000,000 instructions in the pipelined example; each instruction adds 200 ps to the total execution time. The total execution time would be 1,000,000 × 200 ps + 1400 ps, or 200,001,400 ps. In the nonpipelined example, we would add 1,000,000 instructions, each taking 800 ps, so total execution time would be 1,000,000 × 800 ps + 2400 ps, or 800,002,400 ps. Under these conditions, the ratio of total execution times for real programs on nonpipelined to pipelined processors is close to the ratio of times between instructions: 800 002 400 200 001 400 4 00 , , , , . ps ps ps ps   Pipelining improves performance by increasing instruction throughput, in contrast to decreasing the execution time of an individual instruction, but instruction throughput is the important metric because real programs execute billions of instructions. Designing Instruction Sets for Pipelining Even with this simple explanation of pipelining, we can get insight into the design of the RISC-V instruction set, which was designed for pipelined execution. First, all RISC-V instructions are the same length. This restriction makes it much easier to fetch instructions in the first pipeline stage and to decode them in the second stage. In an instruction set like the x86, where instructions vary from 1 byte to 15 bytes, pipelining is considerably more challenging. Modern implementations of the x86 architecture actually translate x86 instructions into simple operations that look like RISC-V instructions and then pipeline the simple operations rather than the native x86 instructions! (See Section 4.11.) Second, RISC-V has just a few instruction formats, with the source and destination register fields being located in the same place in each instruction. Third, memory operands only appear in loads or stores in RISC-V. This restriction means we can use the execute stage to calculate the memory address and then access memory in the following stage. If we could operate on the operands in memory, as in the x86, stages 3 and 4 would expand to an address stage, memory stage, and then execute stage. We will shortly see the downside of longer pipelines. Pipeline Hazards There are situations in pipelining when the next instruction cannot execute in the following clock cycle. These events are called hazards, and there are three different types.

Chapter 4  The Processor Structural Hazard The first hazard is called a structural hazard. It means that the hardware cannot support the combination of instructions that we want to execute in the same clock cycle. A structural hazard in the laundry room would occur if we used a washer- dryer combination instead of a separate washer and dryer, or if our roommate was busy doing something else and wouldn’t put clothes away. Our carefully scheduled pipeline plans would then be foiled. As we said above, the RISC-V instruction set was designed to be pipelined, making it fairly easy for designers to avoid structural hazards when designing a pipeline. Suppose, however, that we had a single memory instead of two memories. If the pipeline in Figure 4.29 had a fourth instruction, we would see that in the same clock cycle, the first instruction is accessing data from memory while the fourth instruction is fetching an instruction from that same memory. Without two memories, our pipeline could have a structural hazard. Data Hazards Data hazards occur when the pipeline must be stalled because one step must wait for another to complete. Suppose you found a sock at the folding station for which no match existed. One possible strategy is to run down to your room and search through your clothes bureau to see if you can find the match. Obviously, while you are doing the search, loads that have completed drying are ready to fold and those that have finished washing are ready to dry. In a computer pipeline, data hazards arise from the dependence of one instruction on an earlier one that is still in the pipeline (a relationship that does not really exist when doing laundry). For example, suppose we have an add instruction followed immediately by a subtract instruction that uses that sum (x19): add  x19, x0, x1 sub  x2, x19, x3 Without intervention, a data hazard could severely stall the pipeline. The add instruction doesn’t write its result until the fifth stage, meaning that we would have to waste three clock cycles in the pipeline. Although we could try to rely on compilers to remove all such hazards, the results would not be satisfactory. These dependences happen just too often and the delay is far too long to expect the compiler to rescue us from this dilemma. The primary solution is based on the observation that we don’t need to wait for the instruction to complete before trying to resolve the data hazard. For the code sequence above, as soon as the ALU creates the sum for the add, we can supply it as an input for the subtract. Adding extra hardware to retrieve the missing item early from the internal resources is called forwarding or bypassing. structural hazard  When a planned instruction cannot execute in the proper clock cycle because the hardware does not support the combination of instructions that are set to execute. data hazard  Also called a pipeline data hazard. When a planned instruction cannot execute in the proper clock cycle because data that are needed to execute the instruction are not yet available. forwarding  Also called bypassing. A method of resolving a data hazard by retrieving the missing data element from internal buffers rather than waiting for it to arrive from programmer- visible registers or memory.

 4.6  An Overview of Pipelining ANSWER load-use data hazard  A specific form of data hazard in which the data being loaded by a load instruction have not yet become available when they are needed by another instruction. pipeline stall  Also called bubble. A stall initiated in order to resolve a hazard. EXAMPLE Forwarding with Two Instructions For the two instructions above, show what pipeline stages would be connected by forwarding. Use the drawing in Figure 4.30 to represent the datapath during the five stages of the pipeline. Align a copy of the datapath for each instruction, similar to the laundry pipeline in Figure 4.27. Figure 4.31 shows the connection to forward the value in x1 after the execution stage of the add instruction as input to the execution stage of the sub instruction. In this graphical representation of events, forwarding paths are valid only if the destination stage is later in time than the source stage. For example, there cannot be a valid forwarding path from the output of the memory access stage in the first instruction to the input of the execution stage of the following, since that would mean going backward in time. Forwarding works very well and is described in detail in Section 4.8. It cannot prevent all pipeline stalls, however. For example, suppose the first instruction was a load of x1 instead of an add. As we can imagine from looking at Figure 4.31, the desired data would be available only after the fourth stage of the first instruction in the dependence, which is too late for the input of the third stage of sub. Hence, even with forwarding, we would have to stall one stage for a load-use data hazard, as Figure 4.32 shows. This figure shows an important pipeline concept, officially called a pipeline stall, but often given the nickname bubble. We shall see stalls elsewhere in the pipeline. Section 4.8 shows how we can handle hard cases like these, using either hardware detection and stalls or software that reorders code to try to avoid load-use pipeline stalls, as this example illustrates. FIGURE 4.30  Graphical representation of the instruction pipeline, similar in spirit to the laundry pipeline in Figure 4.27. Here we use symbols representing the physical resources with the abbreviations for pipeline stages used throughout the chapter. The symbols for the five stages: IF for the instruction fetch stage, with the box representing instruction memory; ID for the instruction decode/ register file read stage, with the drawing showing the register file being read; EX for the execution stage, with the drawing representing the ALU; MEM for the memory access stage, with the box representing data memory; and WB for the write-back stage, with the drawing showing the register file being written. The shading indicates the element is used by the instruction. Hence, MEM has a white background because add does not access the data memory. Shading on the right half of the register file or memory means the element is read in that stage, and shading of the left half means it is written in that stage. Hence the right half of ID is shaded in the second stage because the register file is read, and the left half of WB is shaded in the fifth stage because the register file is written. Time add x1, x2, x3 IF MEM ID WB EX

Chapter 4  The Processor FIGURE 4.31  Graphical representation of forwarding. The connection shows the forwarding path from the output of the EX stage of add to the input of the EX stage for sub, replacing the value from register x1 read in the second stage of sub. Time add x1, x2, x3 sub x4, x1, x5 IF MEM ID WB EX IF MEM ID WB EX Program execution order (in instructions) Reordering Code to Avoid Pipeline Stalls Consider the following code segment in C: a = b + e; c = b + f; Here is the generated RISC-V code for this segment, assuming all variables are in memory and are addressable as offsets from x31: FIGURE 4.32  We need a stall even with forwarding when an R-format instruction following a load tries to use the data. Without the stall, the path from memory access stage output to execution stage input would be going backward in time, which is impossible. This figure is actually a simplification, since we cannot know until after the subtract instruction is fetched and decoded whether or not a stall will be necessary. Section 4.7 shows the details of what really happens in the case of a hazard. Time lw x1, 0(x2) sub x4, x1, x5 IF MEM ID WB EX IF MEM ID WB EX Program execution order (in instructions) bubble bubble bubble bubble bubble EXAMPLE

 4.6  An Overview of Pipelining ANSWER lw  x1, 0(x31) // Load b lw  x2, 8(x31) // Load e add    x3, x1, x2 // b + e sw  x3, 24(x31) // Store a ld  x4, 16(x31) // Load f add    x5, x1, x4 // b + f sw  x5, 32(x31) // Store c Find the hazards in the preceding code segment and reorder the instructions to avoid any pipeline stalls. Both add instructions have a hazard because of their respective dependence on the previous lw instruction. Notice that forwarding eliminates several other potential hazards, including the dependence of the first add on the first lw and any hazards for store instructions. Moving up the third lw instruction to become the third instruction eliminates both hazards: lw    x1, 0(x31) lw    x2, 4(x31) lw    x4, 8(x31) add  x3,   x1, x2 sw    x3, 12(x31) add  x5, x1, x4 sw    x5, 16(x31) On a pipelined processor with forwarding, the reordered sequence will complete in two fewer cycles than the original version. Forwarding yields another insight into the RISC-V architecture, in addition to the three mentioned on page 287. Each RISC-V instruction writes at most one result and does this in the last stage of the pipeline. Forwarding is harder if there are multiple results to forward per instruction or if there is a need to write a result early on in instruction execution. Elaboration:  The name forwarding comes from the idea that the result is passed forward from an earlier instruction to a later instruction. Bypassing comes from passing the result around the register file to the desired unit. Control Hazards The third type of hazard is called a control hazard, arising from the need to make a decision based on the results of one instruction while others are executing. Suppose our laundry crew was given the happy task of cleaning the uniforms of a football team. Given how filthy the laundry is, we need to determine whether the detergent and water temperature setting we select are strong enough to get the uniforms clean but not so strong that the uniforms wear out sooner. In our laundry control hazard  Also called branch hazard. When the proper instruction cannot execute in the proper pipeline clock cycle because the instruction that was fetched is not the one that is needed; that is, the flow of instruction addresses is not what the pipeline expected.

Chapter 4  The Processor pipeline, we have to wait until the second stage to examine the dry uniform to see if we need to change the washer setup or not. What to do? Here is the first of two solutions to control hazards in the laundry room and its computer equivalent. Stall: Just operate sequentially until the first batch is dry and then repeat until you have the right formula. This conservative option certainly works, but it is slow. The equivalent decision task in a computer is the conditional branch instruction. Notice that we must begin fetching the instruction following the branch on the following clock cycle. Nevertheless, the pipeline cannot possibly know what the next instruction should be, since it only just received the branch instruction from memory! Just as with laundry, one possible solution is to stall immediately after we fetch a branch, waiting until the pipeline determines the outcome of the branch and knows what instruction address to fetch from. Let’s assume that we put in enough extra hardware so that we can test a register, calculate the branch address, and update the PC during the second stage of the pipeline (see Section 4.9 for details). Even with this added hardware, the pipeline involving conditional branches would look like Figure 4.33. The instruction to be executed if the branch fails is stalled one extra 200 ps clock cycle before starting. Performance of “Stall on Branch” Estimate the impact on the clock cycles per instruction (CPI) of stalling on branches. Assume all other instructions have a CPI of 1. FIGURE 4.33  Pipeline showing stalling on every conditional branch as solution to control hazards. This example assumes the conditional branch is taken, and the instruction at the destination of the branch is the or instruction. There is a one-stage pipeline stall, or bubble, after the branch. In reality, the process of creating a stall is slightly more complicated, as we will see in Section 4.9. The effect on performance, however, is the same as would occur if a bubble were inserted. add x4, x5, x6 beq x1, x0, 40 or x7, x8, x9 Time Instruction fetch Data access Data access Data access Reg Instruction fetch Instruction fetch Reg Reg 200 ps 400 ps bubble bubble bubble bubble bubble Program execution order (in instructions) Reg ALU Reg ALU Reg ALU EXAMPLE

 4.6  An Overview of Pipelining ANSWER Figure 3.22 in Chapter  3 shows that conditional branches are 10% of the instructions executed in SPECint2006. Since the other instructions run have a CPI of 1, and conditional branches took one extra clock cycle for the stall, then we would see a CPI of 1.10 and hence a slowdown of 1.10 versus the ideal case. If we cannot resolve the branch in the second stage, as is often the case for longer pipelines, then we’d see an even larger slowdown if we stall on conditional branches. The cost of this option is too high for most computers to use and motivates a second solution to the control hazard using one of our great ideas from Chapter 1: Predict: If you’re sure you have the right formula to wash uniforms, then just predict that it will work and wash the second load while waiting for the first load to dry. This option does not slow down the pipeline when you are correct. When you are wrong, however, you need to redo the load that was washed while guessing the decision. Computers do indeed use prediction to handle conditional branches. One simple approach is to predict always that conditional branches will be untaken. When you’re right, the pipeline proceeds at full speed. Only when conditional branches are taken does the pipeline stall. Figure 4.34 shows such an example: FIGURE 4.34  Predicting that branches are not taken as a solution to control hazard. The top drawing shows the pipeline when the branch is not taken. The bottom drawing shows the pipeline when the branch is taken. As we noted in Figure 4.33, the insertion of a bubble in this fashion simplifies what actually happens, at least during the first clock cycle immediately following the branch. Section 4.9 will reveal the details. add x4, x5, x6 beq x1, x0, 40 lw x3, 400(x0) Time Instruction fetch Instruction fetch Data access Reg Instruction fetch Data access Data access Reg Reg Reg ALU Reg ALU Reg ALU Reg ALU Reg ALU Reg ALU 200 ps 200 ps add x4, x5, x6 beq x1, x0, 40 or x7, x8, x9 Time Instruction fetch Data access Reg Instruction fetch Instruction fetch Data access Reg Data access Reg 200 ps 400 ps bubble bubble bubble bubble bubble Program execution order (in instructions) Program execution order (in instructions)

Chapter 4  The Processor A more sophisticated version of branch prediction would have some conditional branches predicted as taken and some as untaken. In our analogy, the dark or home uniforms might take one formula while the light or road uniforms might take another. In the case of programming, at the bottom of loops are conditional branches that branch back to the top of the loop. Since they are likely to be taken and they branch backward, we could always predict taken for conditional branches that branch to an earlier address. Such rigid approaches to branch prediction rely on stereotypical behavior and don’t account for the individuality of a specific branch instruction. Dynamic hardware predictors, in stark contrast, make their guesses depending on the behavior of each conditional branch and may change predictions for a conditional branch over the life of a program. Following our analogy, in dynamic prediction a person would look at how dirty the uniform was and guess at the formula, adjusting the next prediction depending on the success of recent guesses. One popular approach to dynamic prediction of conditional branches is keeping a history for each conditional branch as taken or untaken, and then using the recent past behavior to predict the future. As we will see later, the amount and type of history kept have become extensive, with the result being that dynamic branch predictors can correctly predict conditional branches with more than 90% accuracy (see Section 4.9). When the guess is wrong, the pipeline control must ensure that the instructions following the wrongly guessed conditional branch have no effect and must restart the pipeline from the proper branch address. In our laundry analogy, we must stop taking new loads so that we can restart the load that we incorrectly predicted. As in the case of all other solutions to control hazards, longer pipelines exacerbate the problem, in this case by raising the cost of misprediction. Solutions to control hazards are described in more detail in Section 4.9. Elaboration:  There is a third approach to the control hazard, called a delayed decision. In our analogy, whenever you are going to make such a decision about laundry, just place a load of non-football clothes in the washer while waiting for football uniforms to dry. As long as you have enough dirty clothes that are not affected by the test, this solution works fine. Called the delayed branch in computers, this is the solution actually used by the MIPS architecture. The delayed branch always executes the next sequential instruction, with the branch taking place after that one instruction delay. It is hidden from the MIPS assembly language programmer because the assembler can automatically arrange the instructions to get the branch behavior desired by the programmer. MIPS software will place an instruction immediately after the delayed branch instruction that is not affected by the branch, and a taken branch changes the address of the instruction that follows this safe instruction. In our example, the add instruction before the branch in Figure 4.33 does not affect the branch and can be moved after the branch to hide the branch delay fully. Since delayed branches are useful when the branches are short, it is rare to see a processor with a delayed branch of more than one cycle. For longer branch delays, hardware-based branch prediction is usually used. branch prediction  A method of resolving a branch hazard that assumes a given outcome for the conditional branch and proceeds from that assumption rather than waiting to ascertain the actual outcome.

 4.6  An Overview of Pipelining Understanding Program Performance Pipeline Overview Summary Pipelining is a technique that exploits parallelism between the instructions in a sequential instruction stream. It has the substantial advantage that, unlike programming a multiprocessor (see Chapter 6), it is fundamentally invisible to the programmer. In the next few sections of this chapter, we cover the concept of pipelining using the RISC-V instruction subset from the single-cycle implementation in Section 4.4 and show a simplified version of its pipeline. We then look at the problems that pipelining introduces and the performance attainable under typical situations. If you wish to focus more on the software and the performance implications of pipelining, you now have sufficient background to skip to Section 4.11. Section 4.11 introduces advanced pipelining concepts, such as superscalar and dynamic scheduling, and Section 4.12 examines the pipelines of recent microprocessors. Alternatively, if you are interested in understanding how pipelining is imple­ mented and the challenges of dealing with hazards, you can proceed to examine the design of a pipelined datapath and the basic control, explained in Section 4.7. You can then use this understanding to explore the implementation of forwarding and stalls in Section 4.8. You can next read Section 4.9 to learn more about solutions to branch hazards, and finally see how exceptions are handled in Section 4.10. For each code sequence below, state whether it must stall, can avoid stalls using only forwarding, or can execute without stalling or forwarding. Sequence 1 Sequence 2 Sequence 3 lw   x10, 0(x10) add   x11, x10, x10 addi  x11, x10, 1 add  x11, x10, x10 addi  x12, x10, 5 addi  x12, x10, 2 addi  x14, x11, 5 addi  x13, x10, 3 addi  x14, x10, 4 addi  x15, x10, 5 Outside the memory system, the effective operation of the pipeline is usually the most important factor in determining the CPI of the processor and hence its performance. As we will see in Section 4.11, understanding the performance of a modern multiple-issue pipelined processor is complex and requires understanding more than just the issues that arise in a simple pipelined processor. Nonetheless, structural, data, and control hazards remain important in both simple pipelines and more sophisticated ones. For modern pipelines, structural hazards usually revolve around the floating- point unit, which may not be fully pipelined, while control hazards are usually more of a problem in integer programs, which tend to have higher conditional branch frequencies as well as less predictable branches. Data hazards can be Check Yourself

Chapter 4  The Processor 4.7 Pipelined Datapath and Control Figure 4.35 shows the single-cycle datapath from Section 4.4 with the pipeline stages identified. The division of an instruction into five stages means a five-stage pipeline, which in turn means that up to five instructions will be in execution during any single clock cycle. Thus, we must separate the datapath into five pieces, with each piece named corresponding to a stage of instruction execution: 1. IF: Instruction fetch 2. ID: Instruction decode and register file read 3. EX: Execution or address calculation 4. MEM: Data memory access 5. WB: Write back In Figure 4.35, these five components correspond roughly to the way the data- path is drawn; instructions and data move generally from left to right through the latency (pipeline)  The number of stages in a pipeline or the number of stages between two instructions during execution. performance bottlenecks in both integer and floating-point programs. Often it is easier to deal with data hazards in floating-point programs because the lower conditional branch frequency and more regular memory access patterns allow the compiler to try to schedule instructions to avoid hazards. It is more difficult to perform such optimizations in integer programs that have less regular memory accesses, involving more use of pointers. As we will see in Section 4.11, there are more ambitious compiler and hardware techniques for reducing data dependences through scheduling. Pipelining increases the number of simultaneously executing instructions and the rate at which instructions are started and completed. Pipelining does not reduce the time it takes to complete an individual instruction, also called the latency. For example, the five-stage pipeline still takes five clock cycles for the instruction to complete. In the terms used in Chapter 1, pipelining improves instruction throughput rather than individual instruction execution time or latency. Instruction sets can either make life harder or simpler for pipeline designers, who must already cope with structural, control, and data hazards. Branch prediction and forwarding help make a computer fast while still getting the right answers. The BIG Picture There is less in this than meets the eye. Tallulah Bankhead, remark to Alexander Woollcott, 1922

 4.7  Pipelined Datapath and Control five stages as they complete execution. Returning to our laundry analogy, clothes get cleaner, drier, and more organized as they move through the line, and they never move backward. There are, however, two exceptions to this left-to-right flow of instructions: ■ The write-back stage, which places the result back into the register file in the middle of the datapath ■ The selection of the next value of the PC, choosing between the incremented PC and the branch address from the MEM stage Data flowing from right to left do not affect the current instruction; these reverse data movements influence only later instructions in the pipeline. Note that the first right-to-left flow of data can lead to data hazards and the second leads to control hazards. WB: Write back MEM: Memory access IF: Instruction fetch EX: Execute/ address calculation M u x M u x Address Write data Read data Data memory Read register 1 Read register 2 Write register Write data Registers Read data 1 Read data 2 ALU Zero ALU result ADD Sum Address Instruction Instruction memory Add PC Imm Gen M u x ID: Instruction decode/ register file read FIGURE 4.35  The single-cycle datapath from Section 4.4 (similar to Figure 4.21). Each step of the instruction can be mapped onto the datapath from left to right. The only exceptions are the update of the PC and the write-back step, shown in color, which sends either the ALU result or the data from memory to the left to be written into the register file. (Normally we use color lines for control, but these are data lines.)

Chapter 4  The Processor One way to show what happens in pipelined execution is to pretend that each instruction has its own datapath, and then to place these datapaths on a timeline to show their relationship. Figure 4.36 shows the execution of the instructions in Figure 4.29 by displaying their private datapaths on a common timeline. We use a stylized version of the datapath in Figure 4.35 to show the relationships in Figure 4.36. Figure 4.36 seems to suggest that three instructions need three datapaths. Instead, we add registers to hold data so that portions of a single datapath can be shared during instruction execution. For example, as Figure 4.36 shows, the instruction memory is used during only one of the five stages of an instruction, allowing it to be shared by following instructions during the other four stages. To retain the value of an individual instruction for its other four stages, the value read from instruction memory must be saved in a register. Similar arguments apply to every pipeline stage, so we must place registers wherever there are dividing lines between stages in Figure 4.35. Returning to our laundry analogy, we might have a basket between each pair of stages to hold the clothes for the next step. Figure 4.37 shows the pipelined datapath with the pipeline registers high- lighted. All instructions advance during each clock cycle from one pipeline register FIGURE 4.36  Instructions being executed using the single-cycle datapath in Figure 4.35, assuming pipelined execution. Similar to Figures 4.30 through 4.32, this figure pretends that each instruction has its own datapath, and shades each portion according to use. Unlike those figures, each stage is labeled by the physical resource used in that stage, corresponding to the portions of the datapath in Figure 4.48. IM represents the instruction memory and the PC in the instruction fetch stage, Reg stands for the register file and sign extender in the instruction decode/register file read stage (ID), and so on. To maintain proper time order, this stylized datapath breaks the register file into two logical parts: registers read during register fetch (ID) and registers written during write back (WB). This dual use is represented by drawing the unshaded left half of the register file using dashed lines in the ID stage, when it is not being written, and the unshaded right half in dashed lines in the WB stage, when it is not being read. As before, we assume the register file is written in the first half of the clock cycle and the register file is read during the second half. Program execution order (in instructions) lw x, 100(x4) lw x2, 200(x4) lw x3, 400(x4) Time (in clock cycles) IM DM Reg Reg ALU IM DM Reg Reg ALU IM DM Reg Reg ALU CC 1 CC 2 CC 3 CC 4 CC 5 CC 6 CC 7

 4.7  Pipelined Datapath and Control to the next. The registers are named for the two stages separated by that register. For example, the pipeline register between the IF and ID stages is called IF/ID. Notice that there is no pipeline register at the end of the write-back stage. All instructions must update some state in the processor—the register file, memory, or the PC—so a separate pipeline register is redundant to the state that is updated. For example, a load instruction will place its result in one of the 32 registers, and any later instruction that needs that data will simply read the appropriate register. Of course, every instruction updates the PC, whether by incrementing it or by setting it to a branch destination address. The PC can be thought of as a pipeline register: one that feeds the IF stage of the pipeline. Unlike the shaded pipeline registers in Figure 4.37, however, the PC is part of the visible architectural state; its contents must be saved when an exception occurs, while the contents of the pipeline registers can be discarded. In the laundry analogy, you could think of the PC as corresponding to the basket that holds the load of dirty clothes before the wash step. To show how the pipelining works, throughout this chapter we show sequences of figures to demonstrate operation over time. These extra pages would seem to require much more time for you to understand. Fear not; the sequences take much less time than it might appear, because you can compare them to see what changes occur in each clock cycle. Section 4.8 describes what happens when there are data hazards between pipelined instructions; ignore them for now. FIGURE 4.37  The pipelined version of the datapath in Figure 4.35. The pipeline registers, in color, separate each pipeline stage. They are labeled by the stages that they separate; for example, the first is labeled IF/ID because it separates the instruction fetch and instruction decode stages. The registers must be wide enough to store all the data corresponding to the lines that go through them. For example, the IF/ID register must be 96 bits wide, because it must hold both the 32-bit instruction fetched from memory and the incremented 64-bit PC address. We will expand these registers over the course of this chapter, but for now the other three pipeline registers contain 256, 193, and 128 bits, respectively. Add Address Instruction memory Read register 1 Instruction Read register 2 Write register Write data Read data 1 Read data 2 Registers Address Write data Read data Data memory Add Sum ALU ALU result Zero Imm Gen PC ID/EX IF/ID EX/MEM M u x M u x M u x MEM/WB

Chapter 4  The Processor Figures 4.38 through 4.41, our first sequence, show the active portions of the datapath highlighted as a load instruction goes through the five stages of pipelined execution. We show a load first because it is active in all five stages. As in Figures 4.30 through 4.32, we highlight the right half of registers or memory when they are being read and highlight the left half when they are being written. We show the instruction lw with the name of the pipe stage that is active in each figure. The five stages are the following: 1. Instruction fetch: The top portion of Figure 4.38 shows the instruction being read from memory using the address in the PC and then being placed in the IF/ID pipeline register. The PC address is incremented by 4 and then written back into the PC to be ready for the next clock cycle. This PC is also saved in the IF/ID pipeline register in case it is needed later for an instruction, such as beq. The computer cannot know which type of instruction is being fetched, so it must prepare for any instruction, passing potentially needed information down the pipeline. 2. Instruction decode and register file read: The bottom portion of Figure 4.38 shows the instruction portion of the IF/ID pipeline register supplying the immediate field, which is sign-extended to 64 bits, and the register numbers to read the two registers. All three values are stored in the ID/EX pipeline register, along with the PC address. We again transfer everything that might be needed by any instruction during a later clock cycle. 3. Execute or address calculation: Figure 4.39 shows that the load instruction reads the contents of a register and the sign-extended immediate from the ID/EX pipeline register and adds them using the ALU. That sum is placed in the EX/MEM pipeline register. 4. Memory access: The top portion of Figure 4.40 shows the load instruction reading the data memory using the address from the EX/MEM pipeline register and loading the data into the MEM/WB pipeline register. 5. Write-back: The bottom portion of Figure 4.40 shows the final step: reading the data from the MEM/WB pipeline register and writing it into the register file in the middle of the figure. This walk-through of the load instruction shows that any information needed in a later pipe stage must be passed to that stage via a pipeline register. Walking through a store instruction shows the similarity of instruction execution, as well as passing the information for later stages. Here are the five pipe stages of the store instruction: 1. Instruction fetch: The instruction is read from memory using the address in the PC and then is placed in the IF/ID pipeline register. This stage occurs before the instruction is identified, so the top portion of Figure 4.38 works for store as well as load.

 4.7  Pipelined Datapath and Control FIGURE 4.38  IF and ID: First and second pipe stages of an instruction, with the active portions of the datapath in Figure 4.37 highlighted. The highlighting convention is the same as that used in Figure 4.30. As in Section 4.2, there is no confusion when reading and writing registers, because the contents change only on the clock edge. Although the load needs only the top register in stage 2, it doesn’t hurt to do potentially extra work, so it sign-extends the constant and reads both registers into the ID/EX pipeline register. We don’t need all three operands, but it simplifies control to keep all three. Instruction decode lw Instruction fetch lw Add Address Instruction memory Read register 1 Instruction Read register 2 Write register Write data Read data 1 Read data 2 Registers Address Write data Read data Data memory Add Sum ALU ALU result Zero Imm Gen PC ID/EX IF/ID EX/MEM M u x M u x M u x MEM/WB Add Address Instruction memory Read register 1 Instruction Read register 2 Write register Write data Read data 1 Read data 2 Registers Address Write data Read data Data memory Add Sum ALU ALU result Zero Imm Gen PC ID/EX IF/ID EX/MEM M u x M u x M u x MEM/WB

Chapter 4  The Processor 2. Instruction decode and register file read: The instruction in the IF/ID pipeline register supplies the register numbers for reading two registers and extends the sign of the immediate operand. These three 64-bit values are all stored in the ID/EX pipeline register. The bottom portion of Figure 4.38 for load instructions also shows the operations of the second stage for stores. These first two stages are executed by all instructions, since it is too early to know the type of the instruction. (While the store instruction uses the rs2 field to read the second register in this pipe stage, that detail is not shown in this pipeline diagram, so we can use the same figure for both.) 3. Execute and address calculation: Figure 4.41 shows the third step; the effective address is placed in the EX/MEM pipeline register. 4. Memory access: The top portion of Figure 4.42 shows the data being written to memory. Note that the register containing the data to be stored was read in an earlier stage and stored in ID/EX. The only way to make the data available during the MEM stage is to place the data into the EX/MEM pipeline register in the EX stage, just as we stored the effective address into EX/MEM. 5. Write-back: The bottom portion of Figure 4.42 shows the final step of the store. For this instruction, nothing happens in the write-back stage. Since every instruction behind the store is already in progress, we have no way FIGURE 4.39  EX: The third pipe stage of a load instruction, highlighting the portions of the datapath in Figure 4.37 used in this pipe stage. The register is added to the sign-extended immediate, and the sum is placed in the EX/MEM pipeline register. Execution lw Add Address Instruction memory Read register 1 Instruction Read register 2 Write register Write data Read data 1 Read data 2 Registers Address Write data Read data Data memory AddSum ALU ALU result Zero Imm Gen PC ID/EX IF/ID EX/MEM M u x M u x M u x MEM/WB

 4.7  Pipelined Datapath and Control FIGURE 4.40  MEM and WB: The fourth and fifth pipe stages of a load instruction, highlighting the portions of the datapath in Figure 4.37 used in this pipe stage. Data memory is read using the address in the EX/MEM pipeline registers, and the data are placed in the MEM/WB pipeline register. Next, data are read from the MEM/WB pipeline register and written into the register file in the middle of the datapath. Note: there is a bug in this design that is repaired in Figure 4.43. Memory lw Write-back lw Add Address Instruction memory Read register 1 Instruction Read register 2 Write register Write data Read data 1 Read data 2 Registers Address Write data Read data Data memory Add Sum ALU ALU result Zero Imm Gen PC ID/EX IF/ID EX/MEM M u x M u x M u x MEM/WB Add Address Instruction memory Read register 1 Instruction Read register 2 Write register Write data Read data 1 Read data 2 Registers Address Write data Read data Data memory Add Sum ALU ALU result Zero Imm Gen PC ID/EX IF/ID EX/MEM M u x M u x M u x MEM/WB

Chapter 4  The Processor to accelerate those instructions. Hence, an instruction passes through a stage even if there is nothing to do, because later instructions are already progressing at the maximum rate. The store instruction again illustrates that to pass something from an early pipe stage to a later pipe stage, the information must be placed in a pipeline register; otherwise, the information is lost when the next instruction enters that pipeline stage. For the store instruction, we needed to pass one of the registers read in the ID stage to the MEM stage, where it is stored in memory. The data were first placed in the ID/EX pipeline register and then passed to the EX/MEM pipeline register. Load and store illustrate a second key point: each logical component of the datapath—such as instruction memory, register read ports, ALU, data memory, and register write port—can be used only within a single pipeline stage. Otherwise, we would have a structural hazard (see page 287). Hence, these components, and their control, can be associated with a single pipeline stage. Now we can uncover a bug in the design of the load instruction. Did you see it? Which register is changed in the final stage of the load? More specifically, which instruction supplies the write register number? The instruction in the IF/ ID pipeline register supplies the write register number, yet this instruction occurs considerably after the load instruction! FIGURE 4.41  EX: The third pipe stage of a store instruction. Unlike the third stage of the load instruction in Figure 4.39, the second register value is loaded into the EX/MEM pipeline register to be used in the next stage. Although it wouldn’t hurt to always write this second register into the EX/MEM pipeline register, we write the second register only on a store instruction to make the pipeline easier to understand. Execution sw Add Address Instruction memory Read register 1 Instruction Read register 2 Write register Write data Read data 1 Read data 2 Registers Address Write data Read data Data memory AddSum ALU ALU result Zero Imm Gen PC ID/EX IF/ID EX/MEM M u x M u x M u x MEM/WB

 4.7  Pipelined Datapath and Control FIGURE 4.42  MEM and WB: The fourth and fifth pipe stages of a store instruction. In the fourth stage, the data are written into data memory for the store. Note that the data come from the EX/MEM pipeline register and that nothing is changed in the MEM/WB pipeline register. Once the data are written in memory, there is nothing left for the store instruction to do, so nothing happens in stage 5. Memory sw Write-back sw Add Address Instruction memory Read register 1 Instruction Read register 2 Write register Write data Read data 1 Read data 2 Registers Address Write data Read data Data memory Add Sum ALU ALU result Zero Imm Gen PC ID/EX IF/ID EX/MEM M u x M u x M u x MEM/WB Add Address Instruction memory Read register 1 Instruction Read register 2 Write register Write data Read data 1 Read data 2 Registers Address Write data Read data Data memory Add Sum ALU ALU result Zero Imm Gen PC ID/EX IF/ID EX/MEM M u x M u x M u x MEM/WB

Chapter 4  The Processor Hence, we need to preserve the destination register number in the load instruction. Just as store passed the register value from the ID/EX to the EX/MEM pipeline registers for use in the MEM stage, load must pass the register number from the ID/EX through EX/MEM to the MEM/WB pipeline register for use in the WB stage. Another way to think about the passing of the register number is that to share the pipelined datapath, we need to preserve the instruction read during the IF stage, so each pipeline register contains a portion of the instruction needed for that stage and later stages. Figure 4.43 shows the correct version of the datapath, passing the write register number first to the ID/EX register, then to the EX/MEM register, and finally to the MEM/WB register. The register number is used during the WB stage to specify the register to be written. Figure 4.44 is a single drawing of the corrected datapath, highlighting the hardware used in all five stages of the load register instruction in Figures 4.38 through 4.40. See Section 4.9 for an explanation of how to make the branch instruction work as expected. Graphically Representing Pipelines Pipelining can be difficult to master, since many instructions are simultaneously executing in a single datapath in every clock cycle. To aid understanding, there are two basic styles of pipeline figures: multiple-clock-cycle pipeline diagrams, such as Figure 4.36 on page 298, and single-clock-cycle pipeline diagrams, such as Figures 4.38 through 4.42. The multiple-clock-cycle diagrams are simpler but do not contain all the details. For example, consider the following five-instruction sequence: FIGURE 4.43  The corrected pipelined datapath to handle the load instruction properly. The write register number now comes from the MEM/WB pipeline register along with the data. The register number is passed from the ID pipe stage until it reaches the MEM/ WB pipeline register, adding five more bits to the last three pipeline registers. This new path is shown in color. Add Address Instruction memory Read register 1 Instruction Read register 2 Write register Write data Read data 1 Read data 2 Registers Address Write data Read data Data memory Add Sum ALU ALU result Zero Imm Gen PC ID/EX IF/ID EX/MEM M u x M u x M u x MEM/WB

 4.7  Pipelined Datapath and Control lw    x10, 40(x1) sub      x11, x2, x3 add      x12, x3, x4 lw    x13, 48(x1) add      x14, x5, x6 Figure 4.45 shows the multiple-clock-cycle pipeline diagram for these instructions. Time advances from left to right across the page in these diagrams, and instructions advance from the top to the bottom of the page, similar to the laundry pipeline in Figure 4.27. A representation of the pipeline stages is placed in each portion along the instruction axis, occupying the proper clock cycles. These stylized datapaths represent the five stages of our pipeline graphically, but a rectangle naming each pipe stage works just as well. Figure 4.46 shows the more traditional version of the multiple-clock-cycle pipeline diagram. Note that Figure 4.45 shows the physical resources used at each stage, while Figure 4.46 uses the name of each stage. Single-clock-cycle pipeline diagrams show the state of the entire datapath during a single clock cycle, and usually all five instructions in the pipeline are identified by labels above their respective pipeline stages. We use this type of figure to show the details of what is happening within the pipeline during each clock cycle; typically, the drawings appear in groups to show pipeline operation over a sequence of clock cycles. We use multiple-clock-cycle diagrams to give overviews of pipelining situations. ( Section 4.14 gives more illustrations of single-clock diagrams if you would like to see more details about Figure 4.45.) A single-clock- cycle diagram represents a vertical slice of one clock cycle through a set of multiple- clock-cycle diagrams, showing the usage of the datapath by each of the instructions in the pipeline at the designated clock cycle. For example, Figure 4.47 shows the FIGURE 4.44  The portion of the datapath in Figure 4.43 that is used in all five stages of a load instruction. Add Address Instruction memory Read register 1 Instruction Read register 2 Write register Write data Read data 1 Read data 2 Registers Address Write data Read data Data memory Add Sum ALU ALU result Zero Imm Gen PC ID/EX IF/ID EX/MEM M u x M u x M u x MEM/WB

Chapter 4  The Processor FIGURE 4.45  Multiple-clock-cycle pipeline diagram of five instructions. This style of pipeline representation shows the complete execution of instructions in a single figure. Instructions are listed in instruction execution order from top to bottom, and clock cycles move from left to right. Unlike Figure 4.26, here we show the pipeline registers between each stage. Figure 4.59 shows the traditional way to draw this diagram. Program execution order (in instructions) lw x10, 40(x1) sub x11, x2, x3 add x12, x3, x4 lw x13, 48(x1) add x14, x5, x6 Time (in clock cycles) IM Reg Reg IM DM Reg Reg IM Reg Reg Reg Reg Reg Reg ALU ALU ALU ALU ALU DM DM DM CC 1 CC 2 CC 3 CC 4 CC 5 CC 6 CC 7 CC 8 CC 9 DM IM IM FIGURE 4.46  Traditional multiple-clock-cycle pipeline diagram of five instructions in Figure 4.45. Program execution order (in instructions) lw x10, 40(x1) sub x11, x2, x3 add x12, x3, x4 lw x13, 48(x1) add x14, x5, x6 Time (in clock cycles) Instruction fetch Instruction decode Execution Data access Data access Data access Data access Data access Write-back CC 9 CC 8 CC 7 CC 6 CC 5 CC 4 CC 3 CC 2 CC 1 Instruction fetch Instruction fetch Instruction fetch Instruction fetch Instruction decode Instruction decode Instruction decode Instruction decode Execution Write-back Execution Write-back Execution Write-back Execution Write-back

 4.7  Pipelined Datapath and Control Check Yourself A group of students were debating the efficiency of the five-stage pipeline when one student pointed out that not all instructions are active in every stage of the pipeline. After deciding to ignore the effects of hazards, they made the following four statements. Which ones are correct? 1. Allowing branches and ALU instructions to take fewer stages than the five required by the load instruction will increase pipeline performance under all circumstances. 2. Trying to allow some instructions to take fewer cycles does not help, since the throughput is determined by the clock cycle; the number of pipe stages per instruction affects latency, not throughput. 3. You cannot make ALU instructions take fewer cycles because of the write- back of the result, but branches can take fewer cycles, so there is some opportunity for improvement. 4. Instead of trying to make instructions take fewer cycles, we should explore making the pipeline longer, so that instructions take more cycles, but the cycles are shorter. This could improve performance. FIGURE 4.47  The single-clock-cycle diagram corresponding to clock cycle 5 of the pipeline in Figures 4.45 and 4.46. As you can see, a single-clock-cycle figure is a vertical slice through a multiple-clock-cycle diagram. Add Address Instruction memory Read register 1 Read register 2 Write register Write data Read data 1 Read data 2 Registers Address Write data Read data Data memory Add Sum ALU ALU result Zero Imm Gen PC ID/EX IF/ID EX/MEM Memory sub x11, x2, x3 Write-back lw x10, 40(x1) Execution add x12, x3, x4 Instruction decode lw x13, 48(x1) Instruction fetch add x14, x5, x6 Instruction MEM/WB M u x M u x M u x single-clock-cycle diagram corresponding to clock cycle 5 of Figures 4.45 and 4.46. Obviously, the single-clock-cycle diagrams have more detail and take significantly more space to show the same number of clock cycles. The exercises ask you to create such diagrams for other code sequences.

Chapter 4  The Processor FIGURE 4.48  The pipelined datapath of Figure 4.43 with the control signals identified. This datapath borrows the control logic for PC source, register destination number, and ALU control from Section 4.4. Note that we now need funct fields of the instruction in the EX stage as input to ALU control, so these bits must also be included in the ID/EX pipeline register. MemWrite PCSrc MemtoReg MemRead Add Address Instruction memory Read register 1 Instruction Read register 2 Write register Write data Instruction [31–0] Instruction [11-7] Instruction [30, 14-12] Read data 1 Read data 2 Registers Address Write data Read data Data memory AddSum Add ALU result Zero Imm Gen PC ID/EX IF/ID EX/MEM ALU control ALUOp ALUSrc RegWrite Branch MEM/WB M u x M u x M u x Pipelined Control Just as we added control to the single-cycle datapath in Section 4.4, we now add control to the pipelined datapath. We start with a simple design that views the problem through rose-colored glasses. The first step is to label the control lines on the existing datapath. Figure 4.61 shows those lines. We borrow as much as we can from the control for the simple datapath in Figure 4.21. In particular, we use the same ALU control logic, branch logic, and control lines. These functions are defined in Figures 4.12, 4.20, and 4.22. We reproduce the key information in Figures 4.49 through 4.51 on in two pages in this section to make the following discussion easier to absorb. As was the case for the single-cycle implementation, we assume that the PC is written on each clock cycle, so there is no separate write signal for the PC. By the same argument, there are no separate write signals for the pipeline registers (IF/ ID, ID/EX, EX/MEM, and MEM/WB), since the pipeline registers are also written during each clock cycle. To specify control for the pipeline, we need only set the control values during each pipeline stage. Because each control line is associated with a component active in only a single pipeline stage, we can divide the control lines into five groups according to the pipeline stage. In the 6600 Computer, perhaps even more than in any previous computer, the control system is the difference. James Thornton, Design of a Computer: The Control Data 6600, 1970

 4.7  Pipelined Datapath and Control 1. Instruction fetch: The control signals to read instruction memory and to write the PC are always asserted, so there is nothing special to control in this pipeline stage. 2. Instruction decode/register file read: The two source registers are always in the same location in the RISC-V instruction formats, so there is nothing special to control in this pipeline stage. 3. Execution/address calculation: The signals to be set are ALUOp and ALUSrc (see Figures 4.49 and 4.50). The signals select the ALU operation and either Read data 2 or a sign-extended immediate as inputs to the ALU. 4. Memory access: The control lines set in this stage are Branch, MemRead, and MemWrite. The branch if equal, load, and store instructions set these signals, respectively. Recall that PCSrc in Figure 4.50 selects the next sequential address unless control asserts Branch and the ALU result was 0. 5. Write-back: The two control lines are MemtoReg, which decides between sending the ALU result or the memory value to the register file, and RegWrite, which writes the chosen value. Since pipelining the datapath leaves the meaning of the control lines unchanged, we can use the same control values. Figure 4.51 has the same values as in Section 4.4, but now the seven control lines are grouped by pipeline stage. Implementing control means setting the seven control lines to these values in each stage for each instruction. Since the rest of the control lines starts with the EX stage, we can create the control information during instruction decode for the later stages. The simplest way to pass these control signals is to extend the pipeline registers to include control information. Figure 4.52 above shows that these control signals are then used in the appropriate pipeline stage as the instruction moves down the pipeline, just as the destination register number for loads moves down the pipeline in Figure 4.43. Figure 4.53 shows the full datapath with the extended pipeline registers and with the control lines connected to the proper stage. ( Section 4.14 gives more examples of RISC-V code executing on pipelined hardware using single-clock diagrams, if you would like to see more details.)

Chapter 4  The Processor FIGURE 4.50  A copy of Figure 4.20. The function of each of six control signals is defined. The ALU control lines (ALUOp) are defined in the second column of Figure 4.49. When a 1-bit control to a two-way multiplexor is asserted, the multiplexor selects the input corresponding to 1. Otherwise, if the control is deasserted, the multiplexor selects the 0 input. Note that PCSrc is controlled by an AND gate in Figure 4.48. If the Branch signal and the ALU Zero signal are both set, then PCSrc is 1; otherwise, it is 0. Control sets the Branch signal only during a beq instruction; otherwise, PCSrc is set to 0. FIGURE 4.51  The values of the control lines are the same as in Figure 4.22, but they have been shuffled into three groups corresponding to the last three pipeline stages. FIGURE 4.49  A copy of Figure 4.12. This figure shows how the ALU control bits are set depending on the ALUOp control bits and the different opcodes for the R-type instruction.

 4.8  Data Hazards: Forwarding versus Stalling 4.8 Data Hazards: Forwarding versus Stalling The examples in the previous section show the power of pipelined execution and how the hardware performs the task. It’s now time to take off the rose-colored glasses and look at what happens with real programs. The RISC-V instructions in Figures 4.45 through 4.47 were independent; none of them used the results calculated by any of the others. Yet, in Section 4.6, we saw that data hazards are obstacles to pipelined execution. Let’s look at a sequence with many dependences, shown in color: sub x2, x1, x3 // Register z2 written by sub and x12, x2, x5 // 1st operand(x2) depends on sub or x13, x6, x2 // 2nd operand(x2) depends on sub add x14, x2, x2 // 1st(x2) & 2nd(x2) depend on sub sw x15, 100(x2) // Base (x2) depends on sub The last four instructions are all dependent on the result in register x2 of the first instruction. If register x2 had the value 10 before the subtract instruction and −20 afterwards, the programmer intends that −20 will be used in the following instructions that refer to register x2. What do you mean, why’s it got to be built? It’s a bypass. You’ve got to build bypasses. Douglas Adams, The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy, 1979 FIGURE 4.52  The seven control lines for the final three stages. Note that two of the seven control lines are used in the EX phase, with the remaining five control lines passed on to the EX/MEM pipeline register extended to hold the control lines; three are used during the MEM stage, and the last two are passed to MEM/WB for use in the WB stage. WB M EX WB M WB Control IF/ID ID/EX EX/MEM MEM/WB Instruction

Chapter 4  The Processor FIGURE 4.53  The pipelined datapath of Figure 4.48, with the control signals connected to the control portions of the pipeline registers. The control values for the last three stages are created during the instruction decode stage and then placed in the ID/EX pipeline register. The control lines for each pipe stage are used, and remaining control lines are then passed to the next pipeline stage. WB M EX WB M WB MemWrite PCSrc MemtoReg MemRead Add Address Instruction memory Address Write data Read data Data memory AddSum ALU ALU result Zero PC ID/EX IF/ID EX/MEM MEM/WB ALUOp ALUSrc RegWrite Branch Control Read register 1 Instruction Read register 2 Write register Write data Instruction [31–0] Instruction [11-7] Instruction [30, 14-12] Read data 1 Read data 2 Registers Imm Gen ALU control How would this sequence perform with our pipeline? Figure 4.54 illustrates the execution of these instructions using a multiple-clock-cycle pipeline representation. To demonstrate the execution of this instruction sequence in our current pipeline, the top of Figure 4.54 shows the value of register x2, which changes during the middle of clock cycle 5, when the sub instruction writes its result. The potential of add hazard can be resolved by the design of the register file hardware: What happens when a register is read and written in the same clock cycle? We assume that the write is in the first half of the clock cycle and the read is in the second half, so the read delivers what is written. As is the case for many implementations of register files, we have no data hazard in this case. Figure 4.67 shows that the values read for register x2 would not be the result of the sub instruction unless the read occurred during clock cycle 5 or later. Thus, the instructions that would get the correct value of −20 are add and sw; the and and or instructions would get the incorrect value 10! Using this style of drawing, such problems become apparent when a dependence line goes backward in time.

 4.8  Data Hazards: Forwarding versus Stalling EXAMPLE As mentioned in Section 4.6, the desired result is available at the end of the EX stage of the sub instruction or clock cycle 3. When are the data actually needed by the and and or instructions? The answer is at the beginning of the EX stage of the and and or instructions, or clock cycles 4 and 5, respectively. Thus, we can execute this segment without stalls if we simply forward the data as soon as it is available to any units that need it before it is ready to read from the register file. How does forwarding work? For simplicity in the rest of this section, we consider only the challenge of forwarding to an operation in the EX stage, which may be either an ALU operation or an effective address calculation. This means that when an instruction tries to use a register in its EX stage that an earlier instruction intends to write in its WB stage, we actually need the values as inputs to the ALU. A notation that names the fields of the pipeline registers allows for a more precise notation of dependences. For example, “ID/EX.RegisterRs1” refers to the number of one register whose value is found in the pipeline register ID/EX; that is, the one from the first read port of the register file. The first part of the name, to the left of the period, is the name of the pipeline register; the second part is the name of the field in that register. Using this notation, the two pairs of hazard conditions are 1a. EX/MEM.RegisterRd = ID/EX.RegisterRs1 1b. EX/MEM.RegisterRd = ID/EX.RegisterRs2 2a. MEM/WB.RegisterRd = ID/EX.RegisterRs1 2b. MEM/WB.RegisterRd = ID/EX.RegisterRs2 The first hazard in the sequence on page 313 is on register x2, between the result of sub x2, x1, x3 and the first read operand of and x12, x2, x5. This hazard can be detected when the and instruction is in the EX stage and the prior instruction is in the MEM stage, so this is hazard 1a: EX/MEM.RegisterRd = ID/EX.RegisterRs1 = x2 Dependence Detection Classify the dependences in this sequence from page 313: sub x2, x1, x3 // Register x2 set by sub and x12, x2, x5 // 1st operand(z2) set by sub or x13, x6, x2 // 2nd operand(x2) set by sub add x14, x2, x2 // 1st(x2) & 2nd(x2) set by sub sw x15, 100(x2) // Index(x2) set by sub

Chapter 4  The Processor As mentioned above, the sub–and is a type 1a hazard. The remaining hazards are as follows: ■ The sub–or is a type 2b hazard: MEM/WB.RegisterRd = ID/EX.RegisterRs2 = x2 ■ The two dependences on sub–add are not hazards because the register file supplies the proper data during the ID stage of add. ■ There is no data hazard between sub and sw because sw reads x2 the clock cycle after sub writes x2. Because some instructions do not write registers, this policy is inaccurate; sometimes it would forward when it shouldn’t. One solution is simply to check to see if the RegWrite signal will be active: examining the WB control field of the pipeline register during the EX and MEM stages determines whether RegWrite is asserted. Recall that RISC-V requires that every use of x0 as an operand must yield an operand value of 0. If an instruction in the pipeline has x0 as its destination (for FIGURE 4.54  Pipelined dependences in a five-instruction sequence using simplified datapaths to show the dependences. All the dependent actions are shown in color, and “CC 1” at the top of the figure means clock cycle 1. The first instruction writes into x2, and all the following instructions read x2. This register is written in clock cycle 5, so the proper value is unavailable before clock cycle 5. (A read of a register during a clock cycle returns the value written at the end of the first half of the cycle, when such a write occurs.) The colored lines from the top datapath to the lower ones show the dependences. Those that must go backward in time are pipeline data hazards. Program execution order (in instructions) sub x2, x1, x3 and x12, x2, x5 or x13, x6, x2 add x14, x2, x2 sw x15, 100(x2) Time (in clock cycles) CC 1 CC 2 CC 3 CC 4 CC 5 CC 6 CC 7 CC 8 CC 9 IM DM Reg Reg IM DM Reg Reg IM DM Reg Reg IM DM Reg Reg IM DM Reg Reg Value of register x2: 10/–20 –20 –20 –20 –20 ANSWER

 4.8  Data Hazards: Forwarding versus Stalling example, addi x0, x1, 2), we want to avoid forwarding its possibly nonzero result value. Not forwarding results destined for x0 frees the assembly programmer and the compiler of any requirement to avoid using x0 as a destination. The conditions above thus work properly as long as we add EX/MEM.RegisterRd ≠ 0 to the first hazard condition and MEM/WB.RegisterRd ≠ 0 to the second. Now that we can detect hazards, half of the problem is resolved—but we must still forward the proper data. Figure 4.55 shows the dependences between the pipeline registers and the inputs to the ALU for the same code sequence as in Figure 4.54. The change is that the dependence begins from a pipeline register, rather than waiting for the WB stage to write the register file. Thus, the required data exist in time for later instructions, with the pipeline registers holding the data to be forwarded. If we can take the inputs to the ALU from any pipeline register rather than just ID/EX, then we can forward the correct data. By adding multiplexors to the input FIGURE 4.55  The dependences between the pipeline registers move forward in time, so it is possible to supply the inputs to the ALU needed by the and instruction and or instruction by forwarding the results found in the pipeline registers. The values in the pipeline registers show that the desired value is available before it is written into the register file. We assume that the register file forwards values that are read and written during the same clock cycle, so the add does not stall, but the values come from the register file instead of a pipeline register. Register file “forwarding”—that is, the read gets the value of the write in that clock cycle—is why clock cycle 5 shows register x2 having the value 10 at the beginning and −20 at the end of the clock cycle. Program execution order (in instructions) sub x2, x1, x3 and x12, x2, x5 or x13, x6, x2 add x14, x2, x2 sw x15, 100(x2) Time (in clock cycles) CC 1 CC 2 CC 3 CC 4 CC 5 CC 6 CC 7 CC 8 CC 9 IM Reg Reg IM Reg Reg IM Reg Reg IM Reg Reg IM DM DM DM DM DM Reg Reg 10 10/–20 –20 –20 –20 –20 value of register x2:

Chapter 4  The Processor FIGURE 4.56  On the top are the ALU and pipeline registers before adding forwarding. On the bottom, the multiplexors have been expanded to add the forwarding paths, and we show the forwarding unit. The new hardware is shown in color. This figure is a stylized drawing, however, leaving out details from the full datapath such as the sign extension hardware. Data memory Registers ALU ALU ID/EX a. No forwarding b. With forwarding EX/MEM MEM/WB Data memory Registers ID/EX EX/MEM MEM/WB Forwarding unit EX/MEM.RegisterRd MEM/WB.RegisterRd Rs1 Rs2 Rd ForwardB ForwardA

 4.8  Data Hazards: Forwarding versus Stalling FIGURE 4.57  The control values for the forwarding multiplexors in Figure 4.56. The signed immediate that is another input to the ALU is described in the Elaboration at the end of this section. of the ALU, and with the proper controls, we can run the pipeline at full speed in the presence of these data hazards. For now, we will assume the only instructions we need to forward are the four R-format instructions: add, sub, and, and or. Figure 4.56 shows a close-up of the ALU and pipeline register before and after adding forwarding. Figure 4.57 shows the values of the control lines for the ALU multiplexors that select either the register file values or one of the forwarded values. This forwarding control will be in the EX stage, because the ALU forwarding multiplexors are found in that stage. Thus, we must pass the operand register numbers from the ID stage via the ID/EX pipeline register to determine whether to forward values. Before forwarding, the ID/EX register had no need to include space to hold the rs1 and rs2 fields. Hence, they were added to ID/EX. Let’s now write both the conditions for detecting hazards, and the control signals to resolve them: 1. EX hazard: if (EX/MEM.RegWrite and (EX/MEM.RegisterRd ≠ 0) and (EX/MEM.RegisterRd = ID/EX.RegisterRs1)) ForwardA = 10 if (EX/MEM.RegWrite and (EX/MEM.RegisterRd ≠ 0) and (EX/MEM.RegisterRd = ID/EX.RegisterRs2)) ForwardB = 10 This case forwards the result from the previous instruction to either input of the ALU. If the previous instruction is going to write to the register file, and the write register number matches the read register number of ALU inputs A or B, provided it is not register 0, then steer the multiplexor to pick the value instead from the pipeline register EX/MEM. 2. MEM hazard: if (MEM/WB.RegWrite and (MEM/WB.RegisterRd ≠ 0) and (MEM/WB.RegisterRd = ID/EX.RegisterRs1)) ForwardA = 01

Chapter 4  The Processor if (MEM/WB.RegWrite and (MEM/WB.RegisterRd ≠ 0) and (MEM/WB.RegisterRd = ID/EX.RegisterRs2)) ForwardB = 01 As mentioned above, there is no hazard in the WB stage, because we assume that the register file supplies the correct result if the instruction in the ID stage reads the same register written by the instruction in the WB stage. Such a register file performs another form of forwarding, but it occurs within the register file. One complication is potential data hazards between the result of the instruction in the WB stage, the result of the instruction in the MEM stage, and the source operand of the instruction in the ALU stage. For example, when summing a vector of numbers in a single register, a sequence of instructions will all read and write to the same register: add x1, x1, x2 add x1, x1, x3 add x1, x1, x4 . . . In this case, the result should be forwarded from the MEM stage because the result in the MEM stage is the more recent result. Thus, the control for the MEM hazard would be (with the additions highlighted): if (MEM/WB.RegWrite and (MEM/WB.RegisterRd ≠ 0) and not(EX/MEM.RegWrite and (EX/MEM.RegisterRd ≠ 0) and (EX/MEM.RegisterRd = ID/EX.RegisterRs1)) and (MEM/WB.RegisterRd = ID/EX.RegisterRs1)) ForwardA = 01 if (MEM/WB.RegWrite and (MEM/WB.RegisterRd ≠ 0) and not(EX/MEM.RegWrite and (EX/MEM.RegisterRd ≠ 0) and (EX/MEM.RegisterRd = ID/EX.RegisterRs2)) and (MEM/WB.RegisterRd = ID/EX.RegisterRs2)) ForwardB = 01 Figure 4.58 shows the hardware necessary to support forwarding for operations that use results during the EX stage. Note that the EX/MEM.RegisterRd field is the register destination for either an ALU instruction or a load. If you would like to see more illustrated examples using single-cycle pipeline drawings, Section 4.14 has figures that show two pieces of RISC-V code with hazards that cause forwarding. Elaboration:  Forwarding can also help with hazards when store instructions are dependent on other instructions. Since they use just one data value during the MEM stage, forwarding is easy. However, consider loads immediately followed by stores, useful when performing memory-to-memory copies in the RISC-V architecture. Since copies are frequent, we need to add more forwarding hardware to make them run faster. 

 4.8  Data Hazards: Forwarding versus Stalling If at first you don’t succeed, redefine success. Anonymous If we were to redraw Figure 4.55, replacing the sub and and instructions with lw and sw, we would see that it is possible to avoid a stall, since the data exist in the MEM/WB register of a load instruction in time for its use in the MEM stage of a store instruction. We would need to add forwarding into the memory access stage for this option. We leave this modification as an exercise to the reader. In addition, the signed-immediate input to the ALU, needed by loads and stores, is missing from the datapath in Figure 4.58. Since central control decides between register and immediate, and since the forwarding unit chooses the pipeline register for a register input to the ALU, the easiest solution is to add a 2:1 multiplexor that chooses between the ForwardB multiplexor output and the signed immediate. Figure 4.59 shows this addition. Data Hazards and Stalls As we said in Section 4.6, one case where forwarding cannot save the day is when an instruction tries to read a register following a load instruction that writes the same register. Figure 4.60 illustrates the problem. The data is still being read from memory in clock cycle 4 while the ALU is performing the operation for the following instruction. Something must stall the pipeline for the combination of load followed by an instruction that reads its result. Hence, in addition to a forwarding unit, we need a hazard detection unit. It operates during the ID stage so that it can insert the stall between the load and FIGURE 4.58  The datapath modified to resolve hazards via forwarding. Compared with the datapath in Figure 4.53, the additions are the multiplexors to the inputs to the ALU. This figure is a more stylized drawing, however, leaving out details from the full datapath, such as the branch hardware and the sign extension hardware. M WB WB Registers Instruction memory ALU ID/EX EX/MEM MEM/WB Forwarding unit EX/MEM.RegisterRd MEM/WB.RegisterRd Rs1 Rs2 Rd PC Control EX M WB IF/ID.RegisterRs1 IF/ID.RegisterRs2 IF/ID.RegisterRd Instruction IF/ID Data memory

Chapter 4  The Processor the instruction dependent on it. Checking for load instructions, the control for the hazard detection unit is this single condition: if  (ID/EX.MemRead and ((ID/EX.RegisterRd = IF/ID.RegisterRs1) or (ID/EX.RegisterRd = IF/ID.RegisterRs2))) stall the pipeline Recall that we are using the RegisterRd to refer the register specified in instruction bits 11:7 for both load and R-type instructions. The first line tests to see if the instruction is a load: the only instruction that reads data memory is a load. The next two lines check to see if the destination register field of the load in the EX stage matches either source register of the instruction in the ID stage. If the condition holds, the instruction stalls one clock cycle. After this one-cycle stall, the forwarding logic can handle the dependence and execution proceeds. (If there were no forwarding, then the instructions in Figure 4.60 would need another stall cycle.) If the instruction in the ID stage is stalled, then the instruction in the IF stage must also be stalled; otherwise, we would lose the fetched instruction. Preventing these two instructions from making progress is accomplished simply by preventing Data memory Registers ALU ID/EX EX/MEM MEM/WB Forwarding unit ALUSrc FIGURE 4.59  A close-up of the datapath in Figure 4.56 shows a 2:1 multiplexor, which has been added to select the signed immediate as an ALU input.

 4.8  Data Hazards: Forwarding versus Stalling the PC register and the IF/ID pipeline register from changing. Provided these registers are preserved, the instruction in the IF stage will continue to be read using the same PC, and the registers in the ID stage will continue to be read using the same instruction fields in the IF/ID pipeline register. Returning to our favorite analogy, it’s as if you restart the washer with the same clothes and let the dryer continue tumbling empty. Of course, like the dryer, the back half of the pipeline starting with the EX stage must be doing something; what it is doing is executing instructions that have no effect: nops. How can we insert these nops, which act like bubbles, into the pipeline? In Figure 4.51, we see that deasserting all seven control signals (setting them to 0) in the EX, MEM, and WB stages will create a “do nothing” or nop instruction. By identifying the hazard in the ID stage, we can insert a bubble into the pipeline by changing the EX, MEM, and WB control fields of the ID/EX pipeline register to 0. These benign control values are percolated forward at each clock cycle with the proper effect: no registers or memories are written if the control values are all 0. Figure 4.44 shows what really happens in the hardware: the pipeline execution slot associated with the and instruction is turned into a nop and all instructions beginning nops  An instruction that does no operation to change state. FIGURE 4.60  A pipelined sequence of instructions. Since the dependence between the load and the following instruction (and) goes backward in time, this hazard cannot be solved by forwarding. Hence, this combination must result in a stall by the hazard detection unit. Program execution order (in instructions) lw x2, 20(x1) and x4, x2, x5 or x8, x2, x6 add x9, x4, x2 sub x1, x6, x7 Time (in clock cycles) CC 1 CC 2 CC 3 CC 4 CC 5 CC 6 CC 7 CC 8 CC 9 IM DM Reg Reg IM DM Reg Reg IM DM Reg Reg IM DM Reg Reg IM DM Reg Reg

Chapter 4  The Processor with the and instruction are delayed one cycle. Like an air bubble in a water pipe, a stall bubble delays everything behind it and proceeds down the instruction pipe one stage each clock cycle until it exits at the end. In this example, the hazard forces the and and or instructions to repeat in clock cycle 4 what they did in clock cycle 3: and reads registers and decodes, and or is refetched from instruction memory. Such repeated work is what a stall looks like, but its effect is to stretch the time of the and and or instructions and delay the fetch of the add instruction. Figure 4.62 highlights the pipeline connections for both the hazard detection unit and the forwarding unit. As before, the forwarding unit controls the ALU multiplexors to replace the value from a general-purpose register with the value from the proper pipeline register. The hazard detection unit controls the writing of the PC and IF/ID registers plus the multiplexor that chooses between the real control values and all 0s. The hazard detection unit stalls and deasserts the control fields if the load-use hazard test above is true. If you would like to see more details, Section 4.14 gives an example illustrated using single-clock pipeline diagrams of RISC-V code with hazards that cause stalling. FIGURE 4.61  The way stalls are really inserted into the pipeline. A bubble is inserted beginning in clock cycle 4, by changing the and instruction to a nop. Note that the and instruction is really fetched and decoded in clock cycles 2 and 3, but its EX stage is delayed until clock cycle 5 (versus the unstalled position in clock cycle 4). Likewise, the or instruction is fetched in clock cycle 3, but its ID stage is delayed until clock cycle 5 (versus the unstalled clock cycle 4 position). After insertion of the bubble, all the dependences go forward in time and no further hazards occur. bubble Program execution order (in instructions) lw x2, 20(x1) and becomes nop and x4, x2, x5 or x8, x2, x6 add x9, x4, x2 Time (in clock cycles) CC 1 CC 2 CC 3 CC 4 CC 5 CC 6 CC 7 CC 8 CC 9 CC 10 IM DM Reg Reg IM DM Reg Reg IM DM Reg Reg IM DM Reg Reg IM DM Reg Reg

 4.9  Control Hazards Elaboration:  Regarding the remark earlier about setting control lines to 0 to avoid writing registers or memory: only the signals RegWrite and MemWrite need be 0, while the other control signals can be don’t cares. 4.9 Control Hazards Thus far, we have limited our concern to hazards involving arithmetic operations and data transfers. However, as we saw in Section 4.6, there are also pipeline hazards involving conditional branches. Figure 4.63 shows a sequence of instructions and There are a thousand hacking at the branches of evil to one who is striking at the root. Henry David Thoreau, Walden, 1854 FIGURE 4.62  Pipelined control overview, showing the two multiplexors for forwarding, the hazard detection unit, and the forwarding unit. Although the ID and EX stages have been simplified—the sign-extended immediate and branch logic are missing— this drawing gives the essence of the forwarding hardware requirements. M WB WB Data memory Instruction memory ALU ID/EX EX/MEM MEM/WB Forwarding unit PC Control EX M WB IF/ID Hazard detection unit ID/EX.MemRead IF/ID.RegisterRs1 Instruction IF/ID.RegisterRs2 IF/ID.RegisterRd PCWrite IF/DWrite Registers Rd Rs1 Rs2 ForwardA ForwardB Although the compiler generally relies upon the hardware to resolve hazards and thereby ensure correct execution, the compiler must understand the pipeline to achieve the best performance. Otherwise, unexpected stalls will reduce the performance of the compiled code. The BIG Picture

Chapter 4  The Processor indicates when the branch would occur in this pipeline. An instruction must be fetched at every clock cycle to sustain the pipeline, yet in our design the decision about whether to branch doesn’t occur until the MEM pipeline stage. As mentioned in Section 4.6, this delay in determining the proper instruction to fetch is called a control hazard or branch hazard, in contrast to the data hazards we have just examined. This section on control hazards is shorter than the previous sections on data hazards. The reasons are that control hazards are relatively simple to understand, they occur less frequently than data hazards, and there is nothing as effective against control hazards as forwarding is against data hazards. Hence, we use simpler schemes. We look at two schemes for resolving control hazards and one optimization to improve these schemes. Assume Branch Not Taken As we saw in Section 4.6, stalling until the branch is complete is too slow. One improvement over branch stalling is to predict that the conditional branch will not be taken and thus continue execution down the sequential instruction stream. If the conditional branch is taken, the instructions that are being fetched and decoded must be discarded. Execution continues at the branch target. If conditional branches are untaken half the time, and if it costs little to discard the instructions, this optimization halves the cost of control hazards. To discard instructions, we merely change the original control values to 0s, much as we did to stall for a load-use data hazard. The difference is that we must also change the three instructions in the IF, ID, and EX stages when the branch reaches the MEM stage; for load-use stalls, we just change control to 0 in the ID stage and let them percolate through the pipeline. Discarding instructions, then, means we must be able to flush instructions in the IF, ID, and EX stages of the pipeline. Reducing the Delay of Branches One way to improve conditional branch performance is to reduce the cost of the taken branch. Thus far, we have assumed the next PC for a branch is selected in the MEM stage, but if we move the conditional branch execution earlier in the pipeline, then fewer instructions need be flushed. Moving the branch decision up requires two actions to occur earlier: computing the branch target address and evaluating the branch decision. The easy part of this change is to move up the branch address calculation. We already have the PC value and the immediate field in the IF/ID pipeline register, so we just move the branch adder from the EX stage to the ID stage; of course, the address calculation for branch targets will be performed for all instructions, but only used when needed. The harder part is the branch decision itself. For branch if equal, we would compare two register reads during the ID stage to see if they are equal. Equality can be tested by XORing individual bit positions of two registers and ORing the XORed result. (A zero output of the OR gate means the two registers are equal.) Moving flush  To discard instructions in a pipeline, usually due to an unexpected event.

 4.9  Control Hazards EXAMPLE the branch test to the ID stage implies additional forwarding and hazard detection hardware, since a branch dependent on a result still in the pipeline must still work properly with this optimization. For example, to implement branch if equal (and its inverse), we will need to forward results to the equality test logic that operates during ID. There are two complicating factors: 1. During ID, we must decode the instruction, decide whether a bypass to the equality test unit is needed, and complete the equality test so that if the instruction is a branch, we can set the PC to the branch target address. Forwarding for the operand of branches was formerly handled by the ALU forwarding logic, but the introduction of the equality test unit in ID will require new forwarding logic. Note that the bypassed source operands of a branch can come from either the EX/MEM or MEM/WB pipeline registers. 2. Because the value in a branch comparison is needed during ID but may be produced later in time, it is possible that a data hazard can occur and a stall will be needed. For example, if an ALU instruction immediately preceding a branch produces the operand for the test in the conditional branch, a stall will be required, since the EX stage for the ALU instruction will occur after the ID cycle of the branch. By extension, if a load is immediately followed by a conditional branch that depends on the load result, two stall cycles will be needed, as the result from the load appears at the end of the MEM cycle but is needed at the beginning of ID for the branch. Despite these difficulties, moving the conditional branch execution to the ID stage is an improvement, because it reduces the penalty of a branch to only one instruction if the branch is taken, namely, the one currently being fetched. The exercises explore the details of implementing the forwarding path and detecting the hazard. To flush instructions in the IF stage, we add a control line, called IF.Flush, that zeros the instruction field of the IF/ID pipeline register. Clearing the register transforms the fetched instruction into a nop, an instruction that has no action and changes no state. Pipelined Branch Show what happens when the branch is taken in this instruction sequence, assuming the pipeline is optimized for branches that are not taken, and that we moved the branch execution to the ID stage: 36  sub x10, x4, x8 40  beq x1, x3, 16  // PC-relative branch to 40+16*2=72 44  and x12, x2, x5 48  or x13, x2, x6

Chapter 4  The Processor 52  add x14, x4, x2 56  sub x15, x6, x7 . . . 72  lw x4, 50(x7) Figure 4.64 shows what happens when a conditional branch is taken. Unlike Figure 4.63, there is only one pipeline bubble on a taken branch. Dynamic Branch Prediction Assuming a conditional branch is not taken is one simple form of branch prediction. In that case, we predict that conditional branches are untaken, flushing the pipeline when we are wrong. For the simple five-stage pipeline, such an approach, FIGURE 4.63  The impact of the pipeline on the branch instruction. The numbers to the left of the instruction (40, 44, …) are the addresses of the instructions. Since the branch instruction decides whether to branch in the MEM stage—clock cycle 4 for the beq instruction above—the three sequential instructions that follow the branch will be fetched and begin execution. Without intervention, those three following instructions will begin execution before beq branches to lw at location 72. (Figure 4.33 assumed extra hardware to reduce the control hazard to one clock cycle; this figure uses the nonoptimized datapath.) Reg Program execution order (in instructions) 40 beq x1, x0, 16 44 and x12, x2, x5 48 or x13, x6, x2 52 add x14, x2, x2 72 lw x4, 100(x7) Time (in clock cycles) CC 1 CC 2 CC 3 CC 4 CC 5 CC 6 CC 7 CC 8 CC 9 IM DM Reg Reg IM DM Reg Reg IM DM Reg IM DM Reg Reg IM DM Reg Reg ANSWER

 4.9  Control Hazards FIGURE 4.64  The ID stage of clock cycle 3 determines that a branch must be taken, so it selects 72 as the next PC address and zeros the instruction fetched for the next clock cycle. Clock cycle 4 shows the instruction at location 72 being fetched and the single bubble or nop instruction in the pipeline because of the taken branch.

Chapter 4  The Processor EXAMPLE ANSWER possibly coupled with compiler-based prediction, is probably adequate. With deeper pipelines, the branch penalty increases when measured in clock cycles. Similarly, with multiple issue (see Section 4.11), the branch penalty increases in terms of instructions lost. This combination means that in an aggressive pipeline, a simple static prediction scheme will probably waste too much performance. As we mentioned in Section 4.6, with more hardware it is possible to try to predict branch behavior during program execution. One approach is to look up the address of the instruction to see if the conditional branch was taken the last time this instruction was executed, and, if so, to begin fetching new instructions from the same place as the last time. This technique is called dynamic branch prediction. One implementation of that approach is a branch prediction buffer or branch history table. A branch prediction buffer is a small memory indexed by the lower portion of the address of the branch instruction. The memory contains a bit that says whether the branch was recently taken or not. This prediction uses the simplest sort of buffer; we don’t know, in fact, if the prediction is the right one—it may have been put there by another conditional branch that has the same low-order address bits. However, this doesn’t affect correctness. Prediction is just a hint that we hope is accurate so fetching begins in the predicted direction. If the hint turns out to be wrong, the incorrectly predicted instructions are deleted, the prediction bit is inverted and stored back, and the proper sequence is fetched and executed. This simple 1-bit prediction scheme has a performance shortcoming: even if a conditional branch is almost always taken, we can predict incorrectly twice, rather than once, when it is not taken. The following example shows this dilemma. Loops and Prediction Consider a loop branch that branches nine times in a row, and then is not taken once. What is the prediction accuracy for this branch, assuming the prediction bit for this branch remains in the prediction buffer? The steady-state prediction behavior will mispredict on the first and last loop iterations. Mispredicting the last iteration is inevitable since the prediction bit will indicate taken, as the branch has been taken nine times in a row at that point. The misprediction on the first iteration happens because the bit is flipped on prior execution of the last iteration of the loop, since the branch was not taken on that exiting iteration. Thus, the prediction accuracy for this branch that is taken 90% of the time is only 80% (two incorrect predictions and eight correct ones). dynamic branch prediction  Prediction of branches at runtime using runtime information. branch prediction buffer  Also called branch history table. A small memory that is indexed by the lower portion of the address of the branch instruction and that contains one or more bits indicating whether the branch was recently taken or not.

 4.9  Control Hazards Ideally, the accuracy of the predictor would match the taken branch frequency for these highly regular branches. To remedy this weakness, we can use more prediction bits. In a 2-bit scheme, a prediction must be wrong twice before it is changed. Figure 4.65 shows the finite-state machine for a 2-bit prediction scheme. A branch prediction buffer can be implemented as a small, special buffer accessed with the instruction address during the IF pipe stage. If the instruction is predicted as taken, fetching begins from the target as soon as the PC is known; as mentioned on page 308, it can be as early as the ID stage. Otherwise, sequential fetching and executing continue. If the prediction turns out to be wrong, the prediction bits are changed shows Figure 4.65. Elaboration:  A branch predictor tells us whether a conditional branch is taken, but still requires the calculation of the branch target. In the five-stage pipeline, this calculation takes one cycle, meaning that taken branches will have a one-cycle penalty. One approach is to use a cache to hold the destination program counter or destination instruction using a branch target buffer. The 2-bit dynamic prediction scheme uses only information about a particular branch. Researchers noticed that using information about both a local branch and the global behavior of recently executed branches together yields greater prediction accuracy for the same number of prediction bits. Such predictors are called correlating predictors. A typical correlating predictor might have two 2-bit predictors for each branch, with the choice between predictors made based on whether the last executed branch was taken or not taken. Thus, the global branch behavior can be thought of as adding additional index bits for the prediction lookup. Another approach to branch prediction is the use of tournament predictors. A tournament branch predictor uses multiple predictors, tracking, for each branch, which predictor yields the best results. A typical tournament predictor might contain two predictions for each branch index: one based on local information and one based on global branch behavior. A selector would choose which predictor to use for any given prediction. The selector can operate similarly to a 1- or 2-bit predictor, favoring whichever of the two predictors has been more accurate. Some recent microprocessors use such ensemble predictors. Elaboration:  One way to reduce the number of conditional branches is to add conditional move instructions. Instead of changing the PC with a conditional branch, the instruction conditionally changes the destination register of the move. For example, the ARMv8 instruction set architecture has a conditional select instruction called CSEL. It specifies a destination register, two source registers, and a condition. The destination register gets a value of the first operand if the condition is true and the second operand otherwise. Thus, CSEL X8, X11, X4, NE copies the contents of register 11 into register 8 if the condition codes say the result of the operation was not equal zero or a copy of register 4 into register 11 if it was zero. Hence, programs using the ARMv8 instruction set could have fewer conditional branches than programs written in RISC-V. branch target buffer  A structure that caches the destination PC or destination instruction for a branch. It is usually organized as a cache with tags, making it more costly than a simple prediction buffer. correlating predictor  A branch predictor that combines local behavior of a particular branch and global information about the behavior of some recent number of executed branches. tournament branch predictor  A branch predictor with multiple predictions for each branch and a selection mechanism that chooses which predictor to enable for a given branch.

Chapter 4  The Processor FIGURE 4.65  The states in a 2-bit prediction scheme. By using 2 bits rather than 1, a branch that strongly favors taken or not taken—as many branches do—will be mispredicted only once. The 2 bits are used to encode the four states in the system. The 2-bit scheme is a general instance of a counter-based predictor, which is incremented when the prediction is accurate and decremented otherwise, and uses the mid-point of its range as the division between taken and not taken. Predict taken Not taken Not taken Not taken Not taken Taken Taken Taken Taken Predict not taken Predict not taken Predict taken Pipeline Summary We started in the laundry room, showing principles of pipelining in an everyday setting. Using that analogy as a guide, we explained instruction pipelining step-by-step, starting with the single-cycle datapath and then adding pipeline registers, forwarding paths, data hazard detection, branch prediction, and flushing instructions on mispredicted branches or load-use data hazards. Figure 4.66 shows the final evolved datapath and control. We now are ready for yet another control hazard: the sticky issue of exceptions. Consider three branch prediction schemes: predict not taken, predict taken, and dynamic prediction. Assume that they all have zero penalty when they predict correctly and two cycles when they are wrong. Assume that the average predict accuracy of the dynamic predictor is 90%. Which predictor is the best choice for the following branches? 1. A conditional branch that is taken with 5% frequency 2. A conditional branch that is taken with 95% frequency 3. A conditional branch that is taken with 70% frequency Check Yourself

 4.10  Exceptions 4.10 Exceptions Control is the most challenging aspect of processor design: it is both the hardest part to get right and the toughest part to make fast. One of the demanding tasks of control is implementing exceptions and interrupts—events other than branches that change the normal flow of instruction execution. They were initially created to handle unexpected events from within the processor, like an undefined instruction. The same basic mechanism was extended for I/O devices to communicate with the processor, as we will see in Chapter 5. Many architectures and authors do not distinguish between interrupts and exceptions, often using either name to refer to both types of events. For example, the Intel x86 uses interrupt. We use the term exception to refer to any unexpected change in control flow without distinguishing whether the cause is internal or external; we use the term interrupt only when the event is externally caused. Here are examples showing whether the situation is internally generated by the processor or externally generated and the name that RISC-V uses: exception  Also called interrupt. An unscheduled event that disrupts program execution; used to detect undefined instructions. interrupt  An exception that comes from outside of the processor. (Some architectures use the term interrupt for all exceptions.) FIGURE 4.66  The final datapath and control for this chapter. Note that this is a stylized figure rather than a detailed datapath, so it’s missing the ALUsrc Mux from Figure 4.55 and the multiplexor controls from Figure 4.53. Control Hazard detection unit + PC Instruction memory Imm Gen Registers = + Fowarding unit ALU ID/EX MEM/WB EX/MEM WB M EX IF.Flush IF/ID Data memory WB WB M To make a computer with automatic program-interruption facilities behave [sequentially] was not an easy matter, because the number of instructions in various stages of processing when an interrupt signal occurs may be large. Fred Brooks, Jr., Planning a Computer System: Project Stretch, 1962

Chapter 4  The Processor Type of event From where? RISC-V terminology System reset External Exception I/O device request External Interrupt Invoke the operating system from user program Internal Exception Using an undefined instruction Internal Exception Hardware malfunctions Either Either Many of the requirements to support exceptions come from the specific situation that causes an exception to occur. Accordingly, we will return to this topic in Chapter 5, when we will better understand the motivation for additional capabilities in the exception mechanism. In this section, we deal with the control implementation for detecting types of exceptions that arise from the portions of the instruction set and implementation that we have already discussed. Detecting exceptional conditions and taking the appropriate action is often on the critical timing path of a processor, which determines the clock cycle time and thus performance. Without proper attention to exceptions during design of the control unit, attempts to add exceptions to an intricate implementation can significantly reduce performance, as well as complicate the task of getting the design correct. How Exceptions are Handled in the RISC-V Architecture The only types of exceptions that our current implementation can generate are execution of an undefined instruction or a hardware malfunction. We’ll assume a hardware malfunction occurs during the instruction add x11, x12, x11 as the example exception in the next few pages. The basic action that the processor must perform when an exception occurs is to save the address of the unfortunate instruction in the supervisor exception cause register (SEPC) and then transfer control to the operating system at some specified address. The operating system can then take the appropriate action, which may involve providing some service to the user program, taking some predefined action in response to a malfunction, or stopping the execution of the program and reporting an error. After performing whatever action is required because of the exception, the operating system can terminate the program or may continue its execution, using the SEPC to determine where to restart the execution of the program. In Chapter 5, we will look more closely at the issue of restarting the execution. For the operating system to handle the exception, it must know the reason for the exception, in addition to the instruction that caused it. There are two main methods used to communicate the reason for an exception. The method used in the RISC-V architecture is to include a register (called the Supervisor Exception Cause Register or SCAUSE), which holds a field that indicates the reason for the exception. A second method is to use vectored interrupts. In a vectored interrupt, the address to which control is transferred is determined by the cause of the exception, possibly added to a base register that points to memory range for vectored interrupts. For example, we might define the following exception vector addresses to accommodate these exception types: vectored interrupt  An interrupt for which the address to which control is transferred is determined by the cause of the exception.

 4.10  Exceptions Exception type Exception vector address to be added to a Vector Table Base Register Undefined instruction 00 0100 0000two System Error (hardware malfunction) 01 1000 0000two The operating system knows the reason for the exception by the address at which it is initiated. When the exception is not vectored, as in RISC-V, a single entry point for all exceptions can be used, and the operating system decodes the status register to find the cause. For architectures with vectored exceptions, the addresses might be separated by, say, 32 bytes or eight instructions, and the operating system must record the reason for the exception and may perform some limited processing in this sequence. We can perform the processing required for exceptions by adding a few extra registers and control signals to our basic implementation and by slightly extending control. Let’s assume that we are implementing the exception system with the single interrupt entry point being the address 0000 0000 1C09 0000hex. (Implementing vectored exceptions is no more difficult.) We will need to add two additional registers to our current RISC-V implementation: ■ SEPC: A 64-bit register used to hold the address of the affected instruction. (Such a register is needed even when exceptions are vectored.) ■ SCAUSE: A register used to record the cause of the exception. In the RISC-V architecture, this register is 64 bits, although most bits are currently unused. Assume there is a field that encodes the two possible exception sources mentioned above, with 2 representing an undefined instruction and 12 representing hardware malfunction. Exceptions in a Pipelined Implementation A pipelined implementation treats exceptions as another form of control hazard. For example, suppose there is a hardware malfunction in an add instruction. Just as we did for the taken branch in the previous section, we must flush the instructions that follow the add instruction from the pipeline and begin fetching instructions from the new address. We will use the same mechanism we used for taken branches, but this time the exception causes the deasserting of control lines. When we dealt with branch misprediction, we saw how to flush the instruction in the IF stage by turning it into a nop. To flush instructions in the ID stage, we use the multiplexor already in the ID stage that zeros control signals for stalls. A new control signal, called ID.Flush, is ORed with the stall signal from the hazard detection unit to flush during ID. To flush the instruction in the EX phase, we use a new signal called EX.Flush to cause new multiplexors to zero the control lines. To start fetching instructions from location 0000 0000 1C09 0000hex, which we are using as the RISC-V exception address, we simply add an additional input to the PC multiplexor that sends 0000 0000 1C09 0000hex to the PC. Figure 4.67 shows these changes.

Chapter 4  The Processor This example points out a problem with exceptions: if we do not stop execution in the middle of the instruction, the programmer will not be able to see the original value of register x1 because it will be clobbered as the destination register of the add instruction. If we assume the exception is detected during the EX stage, we can use the EX.Flush signal to prevent the instruction in the EX stage from writing its result in the WB stage. Many exceptions require that we eventually complete the instruction that caused the exception as if it executed normally. The easiest way to do this is to flush the instruction and restart it from the beginning after the exception is handled. The final step is to save the address of the offending instruction in the supervisor exception program counter (SEPC). Figure 4.67 shows a stylized version of the datapath, including the branch hardware and necessary accommodations to handle exceptions. Exception in a Pipelined Computer Given this instruction sequence, 40hex  sub x11, x2, x4 44hex  and x12, x2, x5 48hex  or x13, x2, x6 4Chex  add x1, x2, x1 50hex  sub x15, x6, x7 54hex  lw x16, 100(x7) . . . assume the instructions to be invoked on an exception begin like this: 1C090000hex  sw    x26, 1000(x10) 1C090004hex  sw    x27, 1008(x10) . . . Show what happens in the pipeline if a hardware malfunction exception occurs in the add instruction. Figure 4.68 shows the events, starting with the add instruction in the EX stage. Assume the hardware malfunction is detected during that phase, and 0000 0000 1C09 0000hex is forced into the PC. Clock cycle 7 shows that the add and following instructions are flushed, and the first instruction of the exception- handling code is fetched. Note that the address of the add instruction is saved: 4Chex. EXAMPLE ANSWER

 4.10  Exceptions We mentioned several examples of exceptions on page 333, and we will see others in Chapter 5. With five instructions active in any clock cycle, the challenge is to associate an exception with the appropriate instruction. Moreover, multiple exceptions can occur simultaneously in a single clock cycle. The solution is to prioritize the exceptions so that it is easy to determine which is serviced first. In RISC-V implementations, the hardware sorts exceptions so that the earliest instruction is interrupted. I/O device requests and hardware malfunctions are not associated with a specific instruction, so the implementation has some flexibility as to when to interrupt the pipeline. Hence, the mechanism used for other exceptions works just fine. The SEPC register captures the address of the interrupted instructions, and the SCAUSE register records the highest priority exception in a clock cycle if more than one exception occurs. FIGURE 4.67  The datapath with controls to handle exceptions. The key additions include a new input with the value 0000 0000 1C09 0000hex in the multiplexor that supplies the new PC value; an SCAUSE register to record the cause of the exception; and an SEPC register to save the address of the instruction that caused the exception. The 0000 0000 1C09 0000hex input to the multiplexor is the initial address to begin fetching instructions in the event of an exception. M WB WB Data memory Instruction memory ALU = ID/EX EX/MEM SCAUSE SEPC MEM/WB Forwarding unit PC Control EX M WB IF/ID M u x Hazard detection unit IF.Flush ID.Flush EX.Flush Imm Gen 1C090000 Registers + +

Chapter 4  The Processor FIGURE 4.68  The result of an exception due to hardware malfunction in the add instruction. The exception is detected during the EX stage of clock 6, saving the address of the add instruction in the SEPC register (4Chex). It causes all the Flush signals to be set near the end of this clock cycle, deasserting control values (setting them to 0) for the add. Clock cycle 7 shows the instructions converted to bubbles in the pipeline plus the fetching of the first instruction of the exception routine—sw x26, 1000(x0)—from instruction location 0000 0000 1C09 0000hex. Note that the and and or instructions, which are prior to the add, still complete.

 4.10  Exceptions Elaboration:  The difficulty of always associating the proper exception with the correct instruction in pipelined computers has led some computer designers to relax this requirement in noncritical cases. Such processors are said to have imprecise interrupts or imprecise exceptions. In the example above, PC would normally have 58hex at the start of the clock cycle after the exception is detected, even though the offending instruction is at address 4Chex. A processor with imprecise exceptions might put 58hex into SEPC and leave it up to the operating system to determine which instruction caused the problem. RISC-V and the vast majority of computers today support precise interrupts or precise exceptions. One reason is designers of a deeper pipeline processor might be tempted to record a different value in SEPC, which would create headaches for the OS. To prevent them, the deeper pipeline would likely be required to record the same PC that would have been recorded in the five-stage pipeline. It is simpler for everyone to just record the PC of the faulting instruction instead. (Another reason is to support virtual memory, which we shall see in Chapter 5.) Elaboration:  We show that RISC-V uses the exception entry address 0000 0000 1C09 0000hex, which is chosen somewhat arbitrarily. Many RISC-V computers store the exception entry address in a special register named Supervisor Trap Vector (STVEC), which the OS can load with a value of its choosing. precise interrupt  Also called precise exception. An interrupt or exception that is always associated with the correct instruction in pipelined computers. The hardware and the operating system must work in conjunction so that exceptions behave as you would expect. The hardware contract is normally to stop the offending instruction in midstream, let all prior instructions complete, flush all following instructions, set a register to show the cause of the exception, save the address of the offending instruction, and then branch to a prearranged address. The operating system contract is to look at the cause of the exception and act appropriately. For an undefined instruction or hardware failure, the operating system normally kills the program and returns an indicator of the reason. For an I/O device request or an operating system service call, the operating system saves the state of the program, performs the desired task, and, at some point in the future, restores the program to continue execution. In the case of I/O device requests, we may often choose to run another task before resuming the task that requested the I/O, since that task may often not be able to proceed until the I/O is complete. Exceptions are why the ability to save and restore the state of any task is critical. One of the most important and frequent uses of exceptions is handling page faults; Chapter 5 describes these exceptions and their handling in more detail. Hardware/ Software Interface Which exception should be recognized first in this sequence? 1. xxx x11, x12, x11    // undefined instruction 2. sub x11, x12, x11    // hardware error Check Yourself imprecise interrupt  Also called imprecise exception. Interrupts or exceptions in pipelined computers that are not associated with the exact instruction that was the cause of the interrupt or exception.

Chapter 4  The Processor 4.11 Parallelism via Instructions Be forewarned: this section is a brief overview of fascinating but complex topics. If you want to learn more details, you should consult our more advanced book, Computer Architecture: A Quantitative Approach, sixth edition, where the material covered in these 13 pages is expanded to almost 200 pages (including appendices)! Pipelining exploits the potential parallelism among instructions. This parallelism is called, naturally enough, instruction-level parallelism (ILP). There are two primary methods for increasing the potential amount of instruction- level parallelism. The first is increasing the depth of the pipeline to overlap more instructions. Using our laundry analogy and assuming that the washer cycle was longer than the others were, we could divide our washer into three machines that perform the wash, rinse, and spin steps of a traditional washer. We would then move from a four-stage to a six-stage pipeline. To get the full speed-up, we need to rebalance the remaining steps so they have the same duration, in processors or in laundry. The amount of parallelism being exploited is higher, since there are more operations being overlapped. Performance is potentially greater since the clock cycle can be shorter. Another approach is to replicate the internal components of the computer so that it can launch multiple instructions in every pipeline stage. The general name for this technique is multiple issue. A multiple-issue laundry would replace our household washer and dryer with, say, three washers and three dryers. You would also have to recruit more assistants to fold and put away three times as much laundry in the same amount of time. The downside is the extra work to keep all the machines busy and transferring the loads to the next pipeline stage. Launching multiple instructions per stage allows the instruction execution rate to exceed the clock rate or, stated alternatively, the CPI to be less than 1. As mentioned in Chapter 1, it is sometimes useful to flip the metric and use IPC, or instructions per clock cycle. Hence, a 3-GHz four-way multiple-issue microprocessor can execute a peak rate of 12 billion instructions per second and have a best-case CPI of 0.33, or an IPC of 3. Assuming a five-stage pipeline, such a processor would have up to 20 instructions in execution at any given time. Today’s high-end microprocessors attempt to issue from three to six instructions in every clock cycle. Even moderate designs will aim at a peak IPC of 2. There are typically, however, many constraints on what types of instructions may be executed simultaneously, and what happens when dependences arise. There are two main ways to implement a multiple-issue processor, with the major difference being the division of work between the compiler and the hardware. Because the division of work dictates whether decisions are being made statically (that is, at compile time) or dynamically (that is, during execution), the approaches are sometimes called static multiple issue and dynamic multiple issue. As we will see, both approaches have other, more commonly used names, which may be less precise or more restrictive. instruction-level parallelism  The parallelism among instructions. multiple issue  A scheme whereby multiple instructions are launched in one clock cycle. static multiple issue  An approach to implementing a multiple-issue processor where many decisions are made by the compiler before execution. dynamic multiple issue  An approach to implementing a multiple- issue processor where many decisions are made during execution by the processor.

 4.11  Parallelism via Instructions Two primary and distinct responsibilities must be dealt with in a multiple-issue pipeline: 1. Packaging instructions into issue slots: how does the processor determine how many instructions and which instructions can be issued in a given clock cycle? In most static issue processors, this process is at least partially handled by the compiler; in dynamic issue designs, it is normally dealt with at runtime by the processor, although the compiler will often have already tried to help improve the issue rate by placing the instructions in a beneficial order. 2. Dealing with data and control hazards: in static issue processors, the compiler handles some or all the consequences of data and control hazards statically. In contrast, most dynamic issue processors attempt to alleviate at least some classes of hazards using hardware techniques operating at execution time. Although we describe these as distinct approaches, in reality, one approach often borrows techniques from the other, and neither approach can claim to be perfectly pure. The Concept of Speculation One of the most important methods for finding and exploiting more ILP is speculation. Based on the great idea of prediction, speculation is an approach that allows the compiler or the processor to “guess” about the properties of an instruction, to enable execution to begin for other instructions that may depend on the speculated instruction. For example, we might speculate on the outcome of a branch, so that instructions after the branch could be executed earlier. Another example is that we might speculate that a store that precedes a load does not refer to the same address, which would allow the load to be executed before the store. The difficulty with speculation is that it may be wrong. So, any speculation mechanism must include both a method to check if the guess was right and a method to unroll or back out the effects of the instructions that were executed speculatively. The implementation of this back-out capability adds complexity. Speculation may be done in the compiler or by the hardware. For example, the compiler can use speculation to reorder instructions, moving an instruction across a branch or a load across a store. The processor hardware can perform the same transformation at runtime using techniques we discuss later in this section. The recovery mechanisms used for incorrect speculation are rather different. In the case of speculation in software, the compiler usually inserts additional instructions that check the accuracy of the speculation and provide a fix-up routine to use when the speculation is wrong. In hardware speculation, the processor usually buffers the speculative results until it knows they are no longer speculative. If the speculation is correct, the instructions are completed by issue slots  The positions from which instructions could issue in a given clock cycle; by analogy, these correspond to positions at the starting blocks for a sprint. speculation  An approach whereby the compiler or processor guesses the outcome of an instruction to remove it as a dependence in executing other instructions.

Chapter 4  The Processor allowing the contents of the buffers to be written to the registers or memory. If the speculation is incorrect, the hardware flushes the buffers and re-executes the correct instruction sequence. Misspeculation typically requires the pipeline to be flushed, or at least stalled, and thus further reduces performance. Speculation introduces one other possible problem: speculating on certain instructions may introduce exceptions that were formerly not present. For example, suppose a load instruction is moved in a speculative manner, but the address it uses is not within bounds when the speculation is incorrect. The result would be that an exception that should not have occurred would occur. The problem is complicated by the fact that if the load instruction were not speculative, then the exception must occur! In compiler-based speculation, such problems are avoided by adding special speculation support that allows such exceptions to be ignored until it is clear that they really should occur. In hardware-based speculation, exceptions are simply buffered until it is clear that the instruction causing them is no longer speculative and is ready to complete; at that point, the exception is raised, and normal exception handling proceeds. Since speculation can improve performance when done properly and decrease performance when done carelessly, significant effort goes into deciding when it is appropriate to speculate. Later in this section, we will examine both static and dynamic techniques for speculation. Static Multiple Issue Static multiple-issue processors all use the compiler to assist with packaging instructions and handling hazards. In a static issue processor, you can think of the set of instructions issued in a given clock cycle, which is called an issue packet, as one large instruction with multiple operations. This view is more than an analogy. Since a static multiple-issue processor usually restricts what mix of instructions can be initiated in a given clock cycle, it is useful to think of the issue packet as a single instruction allowing several operations in certain predefined fields. This view led to the original name for this approach: Very Long Instruction Word (VLIW). Most static issue processors also rely on the compiler to take on some responsibility for handling data and control hazards. The compiler’s responsibilities may include static branch prediction and code scheduling to reduce or prevent all hazards. Let’s look at a simple static issue version of an RISC-V processor, before we describe the use of these techniques in more aggressive processors. An Example: Static Multiple Issue with the RISC-V ISA To give a flavor of static multiple issue, we consider a simple two-issue RISC-V processor, where one of the instructions can be an integer ALU operation or branch and the other can be a load or store. Such a design is like that used in some embedded processors. Issuing two instructions per cycle will require fetching and decoding 64 bits of instructions. In many static multiple-issue processors, and issue packet  The set of instructions that issues together in one clock cycle; the packet may be determined statically by the compiler or dynamically by the processor. Very Long Instruction Word (VLIW)  A style of instruction set architecture that launches many operations that are defined to be independent in a single-wide instruction, typically with many separate opcode fields.

 4.11  Parallelism via Instructions essentially all VLIW processors, the layout of simultaneously issuing instructions is restricted to simplify the decoding and instruction issue. Hence, we will require that the instructions be paired and aligned on a 64-bit boundary, with the ALU or branch portion appearing first. Furthermore, if one instruction of the pair cannot be used, we require that it be replaced with a nop. Thus, the instructions always issue in pairs, possibly with a nop in one slot. Figure 4.69 shows how the instructions look as they go into the pipeline in pairs. Static multiple-issue processors vary in how they deal with potential data and control hazards. In some designs, the compiler takes full responsibility for removing all hazards, scheduling the code, and inserting no-ops so that the code executes without any need for hazard detection or hardware-generated stalls. In others, the hardware detects data hazards and generates stalls between two issue packets, while requiring that the compiler avoid all dependences within an instruction packet. Even so, a hazard generally forces the entire issue packet containing the dependent instruction to stall. Whether the software must handle all hazards or only try to reduce the fraction of hazards between separate issue packets, the appearance of having a large single instruction with multiple operations is reinforced. We will assume the second approach for this example. To issue an ALU and a data transfer operation in parallel, the first need for additional hardware—beyond the usual hazard detection and stall logic—is extra ports in the register file (see Figure 4.70). In one clock cycle, we may need to read two registers for the ALU operation and two more for a store, and also one write port for an ALU operation and one write port for a load. Since the ALU is tied up for the ALU operation, we also need a separate adder to calculate the effective FIGURE 4.69  Static two-issue pipeline in operation. The ALU and data transfer instructions are issued at the same time. Here we have assumed the same five-stage structure as used for the single-issue pipeline. Although this is not strictly necessary, it does have some advantages. In particular, keeping the register writes at the end of the pipeline simplifies the handling of exceptions and the maintenance of a precise exception model, which become more difficult in multiple-issue processors.

Chapter 4  The Processor address for data transfers. Without these extra resources, our two-issue pipeline would be hindered by structural hazards. Clearly, this two-issue processor can improve performance by up to a factor of two! Doing so, however, requires that twice as many instructions be overlapped in execution, and this additional overlap increases the relative performance loss from data and control hazards. For example, in our simple five-stage pipeline, loads have a use latency of one clock cycle, which prevents one instruction from using the result without stalling. In the two-issue, five- stage pipeline the result of a load instruction cannot be used on the next clock cycle. This means that the next two instructions cannot use the load result without stalling. Furthermore, ALU instructions that had no use latency in the simple five-stage pipeline now have a one-instruction use latency, since the results cannot be used in the paired load or store. To effectively exploit the parallelism available in a multiple-issue processor, more ambitious compiler or hardware scheduling techniques are needed, and static multiple issue requires that the compiler take on this role. use latency  Number of clock cycles between a load instruction and an instruction that can use the result of the load without stalling the pipeline. FIGURE 4.70  A static two-issue datapath. The additions needed for double issue are highlighted: another 32 bits from instruction memory, two more read ports and one more write port on the register file, and another ALU. Assume the bottom ALU handles address calculations for data transfers and the top ALU handles everything else. Data memory Instruction memory ALU ALU PC + + Imm Gen Registers 1C090000 Write data Address Imm Gen

 4.11  Parallelism via Instructions EXAMPLE ANSWER Simple Multiple-Issue Code Scheduling How would this loop be scheduled on a static two-issue pipeline for RISC-V? Loop: lw x31, 0(x20) // x31=array element       add x31, x31, x21 // add scalar in x21       sw x31, 0(x20) // store result       addi x20, x20, -4 // decrement pointer       blt x22, x20, Loop // compare to loop limit, // branch if x20 > x22 Reorder the instructions to avoid as many pipeline stalls as possible. Assume branches are predicted, so that control hazards are handled by the hardware. The first three instructions have data dependences, as do the next two. Figure 4.71 shows the best schedule for these instructions. Notice that just one pair of instructions has both issue slots used. It takes five clocks per loop iteration; at four clocks to execute five instructions, we get the disappointing CPI of 0.8 versus the best case of 0.5, or an IPC of 1.25 versus 2.0. Notice that in computing CPI or IPC, we do not count any nops executed as useful instructions. Doing so would improve CPI, but not performance! An important compiler technique to get more performance from loops is loop unrolling, where multiple copies of the loop body are made. After unrolling, there is more ILP available by overlapping instructions from different iterations. loop unrolling  A technique to get more performance from loops that access arrays, in which multiple copies of the loop body are made and instructions from different iterations are scheduled together. FIGURE 4.71  The scheduled code as it would look on a two-issue RISC-V pipeline. The empty slots are no-ops. Note that since we moved the addi before the sw, we had to adjust sw’s offset by 4.

Chapter 4  The Processor Loop Unrolling for Multiple-Issue Pipelines See how well loop unrolling and scheduling work in the example above. For simplicity, assume that the loop index is a multiple of four. To significantly reduce the delays in the loop, we need to make four copies of the loop body. After unrolling and eliminating the unnecessary loop overhead instructions, the loop will contain four copies each of lw, add, and sw, plus one addi, and one blt. Figure 4.85 shows the unrolled and scheduled code. During the unrolling process, the compiler introduced additional registers (x28, x29, x30). The goal of this process, called register renaming, is to eliminate dependences that are not true data dependences, but could either lead to potential hazards or prevent the compiler from flexibly scheduling the code. Consider how the unrolled code would look using only x31. There would be repeated instances of lw x31, 0(x20), add x31, x31, x21 followed by sw x31, 8(x20), but these sequences, despite using x31, are actually completely independent—no data values flow between one set of these instructions and the next set. This case is what is called an antidependence or name dependence, which is an ordering forced purely by the reuse of a name, rather than a real data dependence that is also called a true dependence. Renaming the registers during the unrolling process allows the compiler to move these independent instructions subsequently to better schedule the code. The renaming process eliminates the name dependences, while preserving the true dependences. register renaming  The renaming of registers by the compiler or hardware to remove antidependences. antidependence Also called name dependence  An ordering forced by the reuse of a name, typically a register, rather than by a true dependence that carries a value between two instructions. EXAMPLE ANSWER FIGURE 4.72  The unrolled and scheduled code of Figure 4.71 as it would look on a static two-issue RISC-V pipeline. The empty slots are no-ops. Since the first instruction in the loop decrements x20 by 16, the addresses loaded are the original value of x20, then that address minus 4, minus 8, and minus 12.

 4.11  Parallelism via Instructions Notice now that 12 of the 14 instructions in the loop execute as pairs. It takes eight clocks for four loop iterations, which yields an IPC of 14/8 = 1.75. Loop unrolling and scheduling more than doubled performance—8 versus 20 clock cycles for 4 iterations—partly from reducing the loop control instructions and partly from dual issue execution. The cost of this performance improvement is using four temporary registers rather than one, as well as more than doubling the code size. Dynamic Multiple-Issue Processors Dynamic multiple-issue processors are also known as superscalar processors, or simply superscalars. In the simplest superscalar processors, instructions issue in order, and the processor decides whether zero, one, or more instructions can issue in a given clock cycle. Obviously, achieving good performance on such a processor still requires the compiler to try to schedule instructions to move dependences apart and thereby improve the instruction issue rate. Even with such compiler scheduling, there is an important difference between this simple superscalar and a VLIW processor: the code, whether scheduled or not, is guaranteed by the hardware to execute correctly. Furthermore, compiled code will always run correctly independent of the issue rate or pipeline structure of the processor. In some VLIW designs, this has not been the case, and recompilation was required when moving across different processor models; in other static issue processors, code would run correctly across different implementations, but often so poorly as to make compilation effectively required. Many superscalars extend the basic framework of dynamic issue decisions to include dynamic pipeline scheduling. Dynamic pipeline scheduling chooses which instructions to execute in a given clock cycle while trying to avoid hazards and stalls. Let’s start with a simple example of avoiding a data hazard. Consider the following code sequence: lw x31, 0(x21) add x1, x31, x2 sub x23, x23, x3 andi x5, x23, 20 Even though the sub instruction is ready to execute, it must wait for the lw and add to complete first, which might take many clock cycles if memory is slow. (Chapter 5 explains cache misses, the reason that memory accesses are sometimes very slow.) Dynamic pipeline scheduling allows such hazards to be avoided either fully or partially. Dynamic Pipeline Scheduling Dynamic pipeline scheduling chooses which instructions to execute next, possibly reordering them to avoid stalls. In such processors, the pipeline is divided into three major units: an instruction fetch and issue unit, multiple functional units superscalar  An advanced pipelining technique that enables the processor to execute more than one instruction per clock cycle by selecting them during execution. dynamic pipeline scheduling  Hardware support for reordering the order of instruction execution to avoid stalls.

Chapter 4  The Processor (a dozen or more in high-end designs in 2020), and a commit unit. Figure 4. 86 shows the model. The first unit fetches instructions, decodes them, and sends each instruction to a corresponding functional unit for execution. Each functional unit has buffers, called reservation stations, which hold the operands and the operation. (In the next section, we will discuss an alternative to reservation stations used by many recent processors.) As soon as the buffer contains all its operands and the functional unit is ready to execute, the result is calculated. When the result is completed, it is sent to any reservation stations waiting for this particular result as well as to the commit unit, which buffers the result until it is safe to put the result into the register file or, for a store, into memory. The buffer in the commit unit, often called the reorder buffer, is also used to supply operands, in much the same way as forwarding logic does in a statically scheduled pipeline. Once a result is committed to the register file, it can be fetched directly from there, just as in a normal pipeline. The combination of buffering operands in the reservation stations and results in the reorder buffer provides a form of register renaming, just like that used by the compiler in our earlier loop-unrolling example on page 346. To see how this conceptually works, consider the following steps: 1. When an instruction issues, it is copied to a reservation station for the appropriate functional unit. Any operands that are available in the register file or reorder buffer are also immediately copied into the reservation station. reservation station  A buffer within a functional unit that holds the operands and the operation. commit unit  The unit in a dynamic or out-of-order execution pipeline that decides when it is safe to release the result of an operation to programmer- visible registers and memory. reorder buffer  The buffer that holds results in a dynamically scheduled processor until it is safe to store the results to memory or a register. FIGURE 4.73  The three primary units of a dynamically scheduled pipeline. The final step of updating the state is also called retirement or graduation. Instruction fetch and decode unit Reservation station Reservation station Reservation station Reservation station Integer Integer Floating point Load- store Commit unit In-order issue Out-of-order execute Functional units In-order commit . . . . . .

 4.11  Parallelism via Instructions The instruction is buffered in the reservation station until all the operands and the functional unit are available. For the issuing instruction, the register copy of the operand is no longer required, and if a write to that register occurred, the value could be overwritten. 2. If an operand is not in the register file or reorder buffer, it must be waiting to be produced by a functional unit. The name of the functional unit that will produce the result is tracked. When that unit eventually produces the result, it is copied directly into the waiting reservation station from the functional unit bypassing the registers. These steps effectively use the reorder buffer and the reservation stations to implement register renaming. Conceptually, you can think of a dynamically scheduled pipeline as analyzing the data flow structure of a program. The processor then executes the instructions in some order that preserves the data flow order of the program. This style of execution is called an out-of-order execution, since the instructions can be executed in a different order than they were fetched. To make programs behave as if they were running on a simple in-order pipeline, the instruction fetch and decode unit is required to issue instructions in order, which allows dependences to be tracked, and the commit unit is required to write results to registers and memory in program fetch order. This conservative mode is called in-order commit. Hence, if an exception occurs, the computer can point to the last instruction executed, and the only registers updated will be those written by instructions before the instruction causing the exception. Although the front end (fetch and issue) and the back end (commit) of the pipeline run in order, the functional units are free to initiate execution whenever the data they need are available. Today, all dynamically scheduled pipelines use in-order commit. Dynamic scheduling is often extended by including hardware-based speculation, especially for branch outcomes. By predicting the direction of a branch, a dynamically scheduled processor can continue to fetch and execute instructions along the predicted path. Because the instructions are committed in order, we know whether the branch was correctly predicted before any instructions from the predicted path are committed. A speculative, dynamically scheduled pipeline can also support speculation on load addresses, allowing load- store reordering, and using the commit unit to avoid incorrect speculation. In the next section, we will look at the use of dynamic scheduling with speculation in the Intel Core i7 design. Out-of-order execution creates new pipeline hazards that we didn’t see in the earlier pipelines. A name dependence occurs when two instructions use the same out-of-order execution  A situation in pipelined execution when an instruction blocked from executing does not cause the following instructions to wait. in-order commit  A commit in which the results of pipelined execution are written to the programmer visible state in the same order that instructions are fetched. Hardware/ Software Interface

Chapter 4  The Processor register or memory location, called a name, but there is no flow of data between the instructions associated with that name. There are two types of name dependences between an instruction i that precedes instruction j in program order: 1. An antidependence between instructions i and j occurs when instruction j writes a register or memory location that instruction i reads. The original ordering must be preserved to ensure that i reads the correct value. 2. An output dependence occurs when instructions i and j write the same register or memory location. The ordering between the instructions must be preserved to ensure that the value finally written corresponds to instruction j. Our original pipeline hazard was the result of what is called a true data dependence. For example, in the code below there is an antidependence between swc1 and addiu on register x1 and a true data dependence between lwc1 and add.s on register f0. While there are no output dependencies between instructions in a single loop, there are between different iterations of the loop—for example, between the addiu instructions of the first and second iterations. Loop: lwc1 $f0,0(x1) //f0=array element add.s $f4,$f0,$f2 //add scalar in f2 swc1 $f4,0(x1) //store result addiu x1,x1,4 //decrement pointer 8 bytes bne x1,x2,Loop //branch if x1 != x2 A pipeline hazard exists whenever there is a name or data dependence between instructions and they are close enough that the overlap during execution would change the order of access to the operand involved in the dependence. They lead to these more intuitive names of pipeline hazards: 1. An antidependence can lead to a write-after-read (WAR) hazard. 2. An output dependence can lead to a write-after-write (WAW) hazard. 3. A true data dependence or a read-after-write hazard. We don’t have WAR or WAW hazards in our earlier pipelines because all instructions execute in order, and the writes occur only in the last pipeline stage for register–register instructions as well as always in the same pipeline stage for data access in load and store instructions.

 4.11  Parallelism via Instructions Given that compilers can also schedule code around data dependences, you might ask why a superscalar processor would use dynamic scheduling. There are three major reasons. First, not all stalls are predictable. In particular, cache misses (see Chapter  5) in the memory hierarchy cause unpredictable stalls. Dynamic scheduling allows the processor to hide some of those stalls by continuing to execute instructions while waiting for the stall to end. Second, if the processor speculates on branch outcomes using dynamic branch prediction, it cannot know the exact order of instructions at compile time, since it depends on the predicted and actual behavior of branches. Incorporating dynamic speculation to exploit more instruction-level parallelism (ILP) without incorporating dynamic scheduling would significantly restrict the benefits of speculation. Third, as the pipeline latency and issue width change from one implementation to another, the best way to compile a code sequence also changes. For example, how to schedule a sequence of dependent instructions is affected by both issue width and latency. The pipeline structure affects both the number of times a loop must be unrolled to avoid stalls as well as the process of compiler-based register renaming. Dynamic scheduling allows the hardware to hide most of these details. Thus, users and software distributors do not need to worry about having multiple versions of a program for different implementations of the same instruction set. Similarly, old legacy code will get much of the benefit of a new implementation without the need for recompilation. Understanding Program Performance The BIG Picture Both pipelining and multiple-issue execution increase peak instruction throughput and attempt to exploit instruction-level parallelism (ILP). Data and control dependences in programs, however, offer an upper limit on sustained performance because the processor must sometimes wait for a dependence to be resolved. Software-centric approaches to exploiting ILP rely on the ability of the compiler to find and reduce the effects of such dependences, while hardware-centric approaches rely on extensions to the pipeline and issue mechanisms. Speculation, performed by the compiler or the hardware, can increase the amount of ILP that can be exploited via prediction, although care must be taken since speculating incorrectly is likely to reduce performance.

Chapter 4  The Processor Modern, high-performance microprocessors are capable of issuing several instructions per clock; unfortunately, sustaining that issue rate is very difficult. For example, despite the existence of processors with four to six issues per clock, very few applications can sustain more than two instructions per clock. There are two primary reasons for this. First, within the pipeline, the major performance bottlenecks arise from dependences that cannot be alleviated, thus reducing the parallelism among instructions and the sustained issue rate. Although little can be done about true data dependences, often the compiler or hardware does not know precisely whether a dependence exists or not, and so must conservatively assume the dependence exists. For example, code that makes use of pointers, particularly in ways that may lead to aliasing, will lead to more implied potential dependences. In contrast, the greater regularity of array accesses often allows a compiler to deduce that no dependences exist. Similarly, branches that cannot be accurately predicted whether at runtime or compile time will limit the ability to exploit ILP. Often, additional ILP is available, but the ability of the compiler or the hardware to find ILP that may be widely separated (sometimes by the execution of thousands of instructions) is limited. Second, losses in the memory hierarchy (the topic of Chapter 5) also limit the ability to keep the pipeline full. Some memory system stalls can be hidden, but limited amounts of ILP also limit the extent to which such stalls can be hidden. Hardware/ Software Interface Energy Efficiency and Advanced Pipelining The downside to the increasing exploitation of instruction-level parallelism via dynamic multiple issue and speculation is potential energy inefficiency. Each innovation was able to turn more transistors into performance, but they often did so very ineffectively. Now that we have collided with the power wall, we are seeing designs with multiple processors per chip where the processors are not as deeply pipelined or as aggressively speculative as its predecessors. The belief is that while the simpler processors are not as fast as their sophisticated brethren, they deliver better performance per Joule, so that they can deliver more performance per chip when designs are constrained more by energy than they are by the number of transistors. Figure 4.87 shows the number of pipeline stages, the issue width, speculation level, clock rate, cores per chip, and power of several past and recent Intel microprocessors. Note the drop in pipeline stages and power as companies switch to multicore designs.

 4.11  Parallelism via Instructions State whether the following techniques or components are associated primarily with a software- or hardware-based approach to exploiting ILP. In some cases, the answer may be both. 1. Branch prediction 2. Multiple issue 3. VLIW 4. Superscalar 5. Dynamic scheduling 6. Out-of-order execution 7. Speculation 8. Reorder buffer 9. Register renaming Elaboration:  A commit unit controls updates to the register file and memory. Some dynamically scheduled processors update the register file immediately during execution, using extra registers to implement the renaming function and preserving the older copy of a register until the instruction updating the register is no longer speculative. Other processors buffer the result, which, as mentioned above, is typically in a structure called a reorder buffer, and the actual update to the register file occurs later as part of the commit. Stores to memory must be buffered until commit time either in a store buffer (see Chapter 5) or in the reorder buffer. The commit unit allows the store to write to memory from the buffer when the buffer has a valid address and valid data, and when the store is no longer dependent on predicted branches. Elaboration:  Memory accesses benefit from nonblocking caches, which continue servicing cache accesses during a cache miss (see Chapter 5). Out-of-order execution processors need the cache to allow instructions to execute during a miss. FIGURE 4.74  Record of Intel Microprocessors in terms of pipeline complexity, number of cores, and power. The Pentium 4 pipeline stages do not include the commit stages. If we included them, the Pentium 4 pipelines would be even deeper. Microprocessor Intel 486 Year Clock Rate 25 MHz Pipeline Stages Issue Width Out-of-Order/ Speculation No Cores/ Chip Power 5W Intel Pentium 66 MHz No 10W Intel Pentium Pro 200 MHz Yes 29W Intel Pentium 4 Willamette 2000 MHz Yes 75W Intel Pentium 4 Prescott 3600 MHz Yes 103W Intel Core 3000 MHz Yes 75W Intel Core i7 Nehalem 3600 MHz Yes 2-4 87W Intel Core Westmere 3730 MHz Yes 130W Intel Core i7 Ivy Bridge 3400 MHz Yes 130W Intel Core Broadwell 3700 MHz Yes 140W Intel Core i9 Skylake 3100 MHz Yes 165W Intel Ice Lake 4200 MHz Yes 185W Check Yourself

Chapter 4  The Processor 4.12 Putting It All Together: The Intel Core i7 6700 and ARM Cortex-A53 In this section, we explore the design of two multiple-issue processors: the ARM Cortex-A53 core, which is used as the basis for several tablets and cell phones, and the Intel Core i7 6700, a high-end, dynamically scheduled, speculative processor intended for high-end desktops and server applications. We begin with the simpler processor. This section is based on Section 3.12 of Computer Architecture: A Quantitative Approach, sixth edition. The ARM Cortex-A53 The A53 is dual-issue, statically scheduled superscalar with dynamic issue detection, which allows the processor to issue two instructions per clock. Figure 4.75 shows the basic structure of the pipeline. For nonbranch integer instructions, there are eight stages—F1, F2, D1, D2, D3/ISS, EX1, EX2, and WB—as described in the caption. The pipeline is in order, so an instruction can initiate execution FIGURE 4.75  The basic structure of the A53 integer pipeline has eight stages: F1 and F2 fetch the instruction, D1 and D2 do the basic decoding, and D3 decodes more complex instructions and is overlapped with the first stage of the execution pipeline (ISS). After ISS, the Ex1, EX2, and WB stages complete the integer pipeline. Branches use four different predictors depending on type. The floating-point execution pipeline is 5 cycles deep in addition to the 5 cycles needed for fetch and decode, yielding 10 stages total. AGU stands for address generation unit and TLB for transaction lookaside buffer (See Chapter 5). The NEON unit performs the ARM SIMD instructions of the same name. (From Hennessy JL, Patterson DA: Computer architecture: A quantitative approach, 6e, Cambridge MA, 2018, Morgan Kaufmann.) Floating Point execute Integer execute and load-store Instruction fetch & predict Instruction Decode AGU + TLB Instruction cache F1 F3 F2 Writeback D1 Iss Ex1 Ex2 Wr ALU pipe 0 ALU pipe 1 MAC pipe Divide pipe Load pipe MUL/DIV/SQRT pipe ALU pipe Hybrid predictor Indirect predictor Early decode 13-Entry instruction queue F4 D2 Main decode Late decode D3 Issue Integer register file Store pipe NEON register file F1 F2 F3 F4 F5

 4.12  Putting It All Together: The Intel Core i7 6700 and ARM Cortex-A53 FIGURE 4.76  Misprediction rate of the A53 branch predictor for SPECint2006. (Adapted from Hennessy JL, Patterson DA: Computer architecture: A quantitative approach, 6e, Cambridge MA, 2018, Morgan Kaufmann.) 0% 20% 18% 16% 14% 12% 10% 8% 6% 4% 2% 22% 21.0% astar 4.2% bzip2 3.7% gcc 13.4% gobmk 2.9% h264ref 1.3% hmmer 3.9% libquantum 5.9% mcf 3.9% omnetpp 2.6% perlbench 11.1% sjeng 2.9% xalancbmk Brnach misprediction rate only when its results are available and proceeding instructions have initiated. Thus, if the next two instructions are dependent, both can proceed to the appropriate execution pipeline, but they will be serialized when they get to the beginning of that pipeline. When the pipeline issue logic indicates that the result from the first instruction is available, the second instruction can issue. The four cycles of instruction fetch include an address generation unit that produces the next PC either by incrementing the last PC or from one of four predictors: 1. A single-entry branch target cache containing two instruction cache fetches (the next two instructions following the branch, assuming the prediction is correct). This target cache is checked during the first fetch cycle if it hits; then the next two instructions are supplied from the target cache. In case of a hit and a correct prediction, the branch is executed with no delay cycles. 2. A 3072-entry hybrid predictor used for all instructions that do not hit in the branch target cache, and operating during F3. Branches handled by this predictor incur a two-cycle delay. 3. A 256-entry indirect branch predictor that operates during F4; branches predicted by this predictor incur a three-cycle delay when predicted correctly. 4. An eight-deep return stack operating during F4 and incurring a three-cycle delay. Branch decisions are made in ALU pipe 0, resulting in a branch misprediction penalty of eight cycles. Figure 4.76 shows the misprediction rate for SPECint2006. The amount of work wasted depends on both the misprediction rate and the issue rate sustained during the time that the mispredicted branch was followed. As Figure 4.77 shows, wasted work generally follows the misprediction rate, though it may be larger or occasionally shorter.

Chapter 4  The Processor Performance of the A53 Pipeline The A53 has an ideal CPI of 0.5 because of its dual-issue structure. Pipeline stalls can arise from three sources: 1. Functional hazards, which occur because two adjacent instructions selected for issue simultaneously use the same functional pipeline. Because the A53 is statically scheduled, the compiler should try to avoid such conflicts. When such instructions appear sequentially, they will be serialized at the beginning of the execution pipeline when only the first instruction will begin execution. 2. Data hazards, which are detected early in the pipeline and may stall either both instructions (if the first cannot issue, the second is always stalled) or the second of a pair. Again, the compiler should try to prevent such stalls when possible. 3. Control hazards, which arise only when branches are mispredicted. Both TLB (Chapter 5) and cache misses also cause stalls. Figure 4.78 shows the CPI and estimated contributions from various sources. The A53 uses a shallow pipeline and a reasonably aggressive branch predictor, leading to modest pipeline losses while allowing the processor to achieve high clock rates at modest power consumption. In comparison with the i7, the A53 consumes approximately 1/200 the power for a quad-core processor! FIGURE 4.77  Wasted work due to branch misprediction on the A53. Because the A53 is an in-order machine, the amount of wasted work depends on a variety of factors including data dependences and cache misses, both of which will cause a stall. (Adapted from Hennessy JL, Patterson DA: Computer architecture: A quantitative approach, 6e, Cambridge MA, 2018, Morgan Kaufmann.) 0% 20% 18% 16% 14% 12% 10% 8% 6% 4% 2% 22% 19.6% astar 8.5% bzip2 7.2% gcc 16.7% gobmk 2.3% h264ref 0.3% hmmer 8.5% libquantum 8.2% mcf 7.2% omnetpp 4.6% perlbench 14.7% sjeng 6.5% xalancbmk Percent waster work

 4.12  Putting It All Together: The Intel Core i7 6700 and ARM Cortex-A53 FIGURE 4.78  The estimated composition of the CPI on the ARM A53 shows that pipeline stalls are significant but outweighed by cache misses in the poorest-performing programs (Chapter 5). These are subtracted from the CPI measured by a detailed simulator to obtain the pipeline stalls. Pipeline stalls include all three hazards. (From Hennessy JL, Patterson DA: Computer architecture: A quantitative approach, 6e, Cambridge MA, 2018, Morgan Kaufmann.) hmmer h264ref libquantum perlbench sjeng bzip2 gobmk xalancbmk gcc astar omnetpp mcf Memory hierarchy stalls Pipeline stalls Ideal CPI 0.97 1.04 1.07 1.17 1.22 1.33 1.39 1.75 1.76 2.14 3.37 8.56 Elaboration: the Cortex-A53 is a configurable core that supports ARMv8 instruction set architecture. It is delivered as an IP (intellectual property) core. IP cores are the dominant form of technology delivery in embedded personal mobile device and related markets; billions of ARM and MIPS processors have been created from these IP cores. Note that IP cores are different than the cores in Intel i7 multicore computers. An IP core (which may itself be a multicore) is designed to be incorporated with other logic (hence it is the “core” of a chip), including application-specific processors (such as an encoder or decoder for video), I/O interfaces, and memory interfaces, and then fabricated to yield a processor optimized for a particular application. Although the processor core is almost identical, the resultant chips have many differences. One parameter is the size of the L2 cache, which can vary by a factor of 16. The Intel Core i7 6700 The x86 microprocessor employs sophisticated pipelining approaches, using both dynamic multiple issue and dynamic pipeline scheduling with out-of- order execution and speculation for its 14-stage pipeline. These processors, 

Chapter 4  The Processor however, still face the challenge of implementing the complex x86 instruction set, described in Chapter 2. Intel fetches x86 instructions and translates them into internal MIPS-like instructions that Intel calls micro-operations. The micro-operations are then executed by a sophisticated, dynamically scheduled, speculative pipeline capable of sustaining an execution rate of up to six micro- operations per clock cycle. This section focuses on that micro-operation pipeline. When we consider the design of sophisticated, dynamically scheduled processors, the design of the functional units, the cache and register file, instruction issue, and overall pipeline control become intermingled, making it difficult to separate the datapath from the pipeline. Because of this interdependence, many engineers and researchers use the term microarchitecture to refer to the detailed internal architecture of a processor. The Intel Core i7 uses a scheme for resolving antidependences and incorrect speculation that uses a reorder buffer together with register renaming. Register renaming explicitly renames the architectural registers in a processor (16 in the case of the 64-bit version of the x86 architecture) to a larger set of physical registers. The Core i7 uses register renaming to remove antidependences. Register renaming requires the processor to maintain a map between the architectural and physical registers, indicating which physical register is the most current copy of an architectural register. By keeping track of the renamings that have occurred, register renaming offers another approach to recovery in the event of incorrect speculation: simply undo the mappings that have occurred since the first incorrectly speculated instruction. This will cause the state of the processor to return to the last correctly executed instruction, keeping the correct mapping between the architectural and physical registers. Figure 4.79 shows the overall structure of the i7 pipeline. We will examine the pipeline by starting with instruction fetch and continuing on to instruction commit, following the eight steps labeled in the figure. 1. Instruction fetch—the processor uses a sophisticated multilevel branch predictor to achieve a balance between speed and prediction accuracy. There is also a return address stack to speed up function return. Mispredictions cause a penalty of about 17 cycles. Using the predicted address, the instruction fetch unit fetches 16 bytes from the instruction cache. 2. The 16 bytes are placed in the predecode instruction buffer—the predecode stage also breaks the 16 bytes into individual x86 instructions. This predecode is nontrivial because the length of an x86 instruction can be from 1 to 17 bytes and the predecoder must look through a number of bytes before it knows the instruction length. Individual x86 instructions are placed into the instruction queue. microarchitecture  The organization of the processor, including the major functional units, their interconnection, and control. architectural registers  The instruction set of visible registers of a processor; for example, in RISC-V, there are 32 integer and 32 floating- point registers.

 4.12  Putting It All Together: The Intel Core i7 6700 and ARM Cortex-A53 FIGURE 4.79  The Intel Core i7 pipeline structure shown with the memory system components. The total pipeline depth is 14 stages, with branch mispredictions typically costing 17 cycles and the extra few cycles likely due to time to reset the branch predictor. This design can buffer 72 loads and 56 stores. The six independent functional units can each begin execution of a ready micro-operation in the same cycle. Up to four micro-operations can be processed in the register-renaming table. The first i7 processor was introduced in 2008; the i7 6700 is the sixth generation. The basic structure of the i7 is similar, but successive generations have enhanced performance by changing cache strategies (Chapter 5), increasing memory bandwidth, expanding the number of instructions in flight, enhancing branch prediction, and improving graphics support. (From Hennessy JL, Patterson DA: Computer architecture: A quantitative approach, 6e, Cambridge MA, 2018, Morgan Kaufmann.) 256 KB unified l2 cache (4-way) Register alias table and allocator 224-Entry reorder buffer 97-Entry reservation station Retirement register file ALU shift SSE shuffle ALU 128-bit FMUL FDIV 128-bit FMUL FDIV 128-bit FMUL FDIV SSE shuffle ALU SSE shuffle ALU Memory order buffer (72 load; 56 stores pending) ALU shift ALU shift Load address Store address Store data Store & load Micro -code Complex macro-op decoder 64-Entry micro-op loop stream detect buffer Simple macro-op decoder Simple macro-op decoder Simple macro-op decoder 128-Entry inst. TLB (8-way) Instruction fetch hardware Instruction queue 32 KB Inst. cache (8-way associative) Pre-decode+macro-op fusion, fetch buffer 64-Entry data TLB (4-way associative) 32-KB dual-ported data cache (8-way associative) 1536-Entry unified L2 TLB (12-way) 8 MB all core shared and inclusive L3 cache (16-way associative) Uncore arbiter (handles scheduling and clock/power state differences)

Chapter 4  The Processor 3. Micro-op decode—three of the decoders handle x86 instructions that translate directly into one micro-operation (micro-op). For x86 instructions that have more complex semantics, there is a microcode engine used to produce the micro-operation sequence; it can produce up to four micro- operations every cycle and continues until the necessary micro-operation sequence has been generated. The micro-operations are placed according to the order of the x86 instructions in the 64-entry micro-operation buffer. 4. The micro-operation buffer preforms loop stream detection—If there are a small sequence of instructions (less than 64 instructions) comprised in a loop, the loop stream detector will find the loop and directly issue the micro-operations from the buffer, eliminating the need for activating the instruction fetch and instruction decode stages. 5. Perform the basic instruction issue—looking up the register location in the register tables, renaming the registers, allocating a reorder buffer entry, and fetching any results from the registers or reorder buffer before sending the micro-operations to the reservation stations. Up to four micro-operations can be processed every clock cycle; they are assigned the next available reorder buffer entries. 6. The i7 uses a centralized reservation station shared by six functional units. Up to six micro-operations may be dispatched to the functional units every clock cycle. 7. The individual function units execute the micro-operations, and then results are sent back to any waiting reservation station as well as to the register retirement unit, where they will update the register state once it is known that the instruction is no longer speculative. The entry corresponding to the instruction in the reorder buffer is marked as complete. 8. When one or more instructions at the head of the reorder buffer have been marked as complete, the pending writes in the register retirement unit are executed, and the instructions are removed from the reorder buffer. Elaboration: hardware in the second and fourth steps can combine or fuse operations together to reduce the number of operations that must be performed. Macro-op fusion in the second step takes x86 instruction combinations, such as compare followed by a branch, and fuses them into a single operation. Microfusion in the fourth step combines micro-operation pairs such as load/ALU operation and ALU operation/store and issues them to a single reservation station (where they can still issue independently), thus increasing the usage of the buffer. In a study of the Intel Core architecture that also incorporated microfusion and macrofusion, Bird et al. [2007] discovered that microfusion had little impact on performance, whereas macrofusion appeared to have a modest positive impact on integer performance and little impact on floating-point performance.

 4.12  Putting It All Together: The Intel Core i7 6700 and ARM Cortex-A53 Performance of the i7 Because of the presence of aggressive speculation, it is difficult to accurately attribute the gap between idealized and actual performance. The extensive queues and buffers on the 6700 significantly reduce the probability of stalls because of a lack of reservation stations, renaming registers, or reorder buffers. Thus, most losses come either from branch mispredicts or cache misses. The cost of a branch mispredict is 17 cycles, whereas the cost of an L1 miss is about 10 cycles (Chapter 5). An L2 miss is slightly more than 3 times as costly as an L1 miss, and an L3 miss costs about 13 times what an L1 miss costs (130–135 cycles). Although the processor will attempt to find alternative instructions to execute during L2 and L3 misses, it is likely that some of the buffers will fill before a miss completes, causing the processor to stop issuing instructions. Figure 4.80 shows the overall CPI for the 19 SPECCPUint2006 benchmarks. The average CPI on the i7 6700 is 0.71. Figure 4.81 shows the misprediction rate FIGURE 4.80  The CPI for the SPECCPUint2006 benchmarks on the i7 6700. The data in this section were collected by Professor Lu Peng and PhD student Qun Liu, both of Louisiana State University. (Adapted from Hennessy JL, Patterson DA: Computer architecture: A quantitative approach, 6e, Cambridge MA, 2018, Morgan Kaufmann.) 0.71 0.54 0.68 0.81 0.42 0.47 0.41 1.44 1.37 0.38 0.60 0.76 2.5 1.5 0.5 Cycles per instruction astar bzip2 gcc gobmk h264ref hmmer libquantum mcf omnetpp perlbench sjeng xalancbmk

Chapter 4  The Processor 0% 8% 6% 4% 2% 10% 5.7% astar 4.2% bzip2 0.8% gcc 8.2% gobmk 1.9% h264ref 0.9% hmmer 0.3% libquantum 4.8% mcf 1.5% omnetpp 0.7% perlbench 3.0% sjeng 2.3% xalancbmk Brnach misprediction rate FIGURE 4.81  The misprediction rate for the integer SPECCPU2006 benchmarks on the Intel Core i7 6700. The misprediction rate is computed as the ratio of completed branches that are mispredicted versus all completed branches. (Adapted from Hennessy JL, Patterson DA: Computer architecture: A quantitative approach, 6e, Cambridge MA, 2018, Morgan Kaufmann.) of the branch predictors of the Intel i7 6700. The misprediction rates are roughly half those for the A53 in Figure 4.82—the median is 2.3% vs 3.9% for SPEC2006— and the CPI is less than half: the median is 0.64 versus 1.36 for the much more aggressive architecture. The clock rate is 3.4 GHz on the i7 versus up to 1.3 GHz for the A53, so the average instruction time is 0.64 x 1/3.4 GHz = 0.18 ns versus 1.36 x 1/1.3 Ghz = 1.05 ns, or more than five times as fast. On the other hand, the i7 uses 200x as much power! The Intel Core i7 combines a 14-stage pipeline and aggressive multiple issue to achieve high performance. By keeping the latencies for back-to-back operations low, the impact of data dependences is reduced. What are the most serious potential performance bottlenecks for programs running on this processor? The following list includes some possible performance problems, the last three of which can apply in some form to any high-performance pipelined processor. ■ The use of x86 instructions that do not map to a few simple micro-operations ■ Branches that are difficult to predict, causing misprediction stalls and restarts when speculation fails ■ Long dependences—typically caused by long-running instructions or the memory hierarchy—that lead to stalls ■ Performance delays arising in accessing memory (see Chapter 5) that cause the processor to stall Understanding Program Performance

 4.13  Going Faster: Instruction-Level Parallelism and Matrix Multiply 4.13 Going Faster: Instruction-Level Parallelism and Matrix Multiply Returning to the DGEMM example from Chapter 3, we can see the impact of instruction-level parallelism by unrolling the loop so that the multiple-issue, out- of-order execution processor has more instructions to work with. Figure 4.82 shows the unrolled version of Figure 3.20, which contains the C intrinsics to produce the AVX instructions. Like the unrolling example in Figure 4.85 above, we are going to unroll the loop four times. Rather than manually unrolling the loop in C by making four copies of each of the intrinsics in Figure 3.20, we can rely on the gcc compiler to do the unrolling at −O3 optimization. (We use the constant UNROLL in the C code to control the amount of unrolling in case we want to try other values.) We surround each intrinsic with a simple for loop with four iterations (lines 9, 15, and 19) and replace the scalar C0 in Figure 3.20 with a four-element array c[] (lines 8, 10, 16, and 20). FIGURE 4.82  Optimized C version of DGEMM using C intrinsics to generate the AVX subword-parallel instructions for the x86 (Figure 3.20) and loop unrolling to create more opportunities for instruction-level parallelism. Figure 4.96 shows the assembly language produced by the compiler for the inner loop, which unrolls the three for-loop bodies to expose instruction-level parallelism. 1. #include <x86intrin.h> 2. #define UNROLL (4) 3. 4. void dgemm (int n, double* A, double* B, double* C) 5. { 6. for (int i = 0; i < n; i+=UNROLL*8) 7. for (int j = 0; j < n; ++j){ 8. __m512d c[UNROLL]; 9. for (int r=0;r<UNROLL;r++) 10. c[r] = _mm512_load_pd(C+i+r*8+j*n); //[ UNROLL]; 11. 12. for( int k = 0; k < n; k++ ) 13. { 14. __m512d bb = _mm512_broadcastsd_pd(_mm_load_sd(B+j*n+k)); 15. for (int r=0;r<UNROLL;r++) 16. c[r] = _mm512_fmadd_pd(_mm512_load_pd(A+n*k+r*8+i), bb, c[r]); 17. } 18. 19. for (int r=0;r<UNROLL;r++) 20. _mm512_store_pd(C+i+r*8+j*n, c[r]); 21. } 22. } 

Chapter 4  The Processor Figure 4.83 shows the assembly language output of the unrolled code. As expected, in Figure 4.83 there are four versions of each of the AVX instructions in Figure 3.23, with one exception. We only need one copy of the vbroadcastsd instruction, since we can use the eight copies of the B element in register %ymm0 repeatedly throughout the loop. Thus, the five AVX instructions in Figure 3.23 become 13 in Figure 4.83, and the seven integer instructions appear in both, although the constants and addressing changes to account for the unrolling. Hence, despite unrolling four times, the number of instructions in the body of the loop only doubles: from 11 to 20. Optimizations for subword parallelism and instruction-level parallelism result in an overall speedup of 8.59 versus the unoptimized DGEMM in Figure 3.19. Compared to the Python version in Chapter 1, it is 4600 times as fast. Elaboration:  There are no pipeline stalls despite the reuse of register %zmm5 in lines 9 to 12 of Figure 4.83 because the Intel Core i7 pipeline renames the registers. FIGURE 4.83  The x86 assembly language for the body of the nested loops generated by compiling the unrolled C code in Figure 4.82. . vmovapd (%r11),%zmm4 # Load 8 elements of C into %zmm4 . mov %rbx,%rcx # register %rcx = %rbx . xor %eax,%eax # register %eax = 0 . vmovapd 0x20(%r11),%zmm3 # Load 8 elements of C into %zmm3 . vmovapd 0x40(%r11),%zmm2 # Load 8 elements of C into %zmm2 . vmovapd 0x60(%r11),%zmm1 # Load 8 elements of C into %zmm1 . vbroadcastsd (%rax,%r8,8),%zmm0 # Make 8 copies of B element in %zmm0 . add $0x8,%rax # register %rax = %rax + 8 . vfmadd231pd (%rcx),%zmm0,%zmm4 # Parallel mul & add %zmm0, %zmm4 10 . vfmadd231pd 0x20(%rcx),%zmm0,%zmm3 # Parallel mul & add %zmm0, %zmm3 11 . vfmadd231pd 0x40(%rcx),%zmm0,%zmm2 # Parallel mul & add %zmm0, %zmm2 12 . vfmadd231pd 0x60(%rcx),%zmm0,%zmm1 # Parallel mul & add %zmm0, %zmm1 13 . add %r9,%rcx # register %rcx = %rcx 14 . cmp %r10,%rax # compare %r10 to %rax 15 . jne 50 <dgemm+0x50> # jump if not %r10 != %rax 16 . add $0x1, %esi # register % esi = % esi + 1 17 . vmovapd %zmm4, (%r11) # Store %zmm4 into 8 C elements 18 . vmovapd %zmm3, 0x20(%r11) # Store %zmm3 into 8 C elements 19 . vmovapd %zmm2, 0x40(%r11) # Store %zmm2 into 8 C elements 20 . vmovapd %zmm1, 0x60(%r11) # Store %zmm1 into 8 C elements 

 4.15  Fallacies and Pitfalls 4.14   Advanced Topic: An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language to Describe and Model a Pipeline and More Pipelining Illustrations Modern digital design is done using hardware description languages and modern computer-aided synthesis tools that can create detailed hardware designs from the descriptions using both libraries and logic synthesis. Entire books are written on such languages and their use in digital design. This section, which appears online, gives a brief introduction and shows how a hardware design language, Verilog in this case, can be used to describe the processor control both behaviorally and in a form suitable for hardware synthesis. It then provides a series of behavioral models in Verilog of the five-stage pipeline. The initial model ignores hazards, and additions to the model highlight the changes for forwarding, data hazards, and branch hazards. We then provide about a dozen illustrations using the single-cycle graphical pipeline representation for readers who want to see more detail on how pipelines work for a few sequences of RISC-V instructions. 4.15 Fallacies and Pitfalls Fallacy:  Pipelining is easy. Our books testify to the subtlety of correct pipeline execution. Our advanced book had a pipeline bug in its first edition, despite its being reviewed by more than 100 people and being class-tested at 18 universities. The bug was uncovered only when someone tried to build the computer in that book. The fact that the Verilog Are the following statements true or false? 1. The Intel Core i7 uses a multiple-issue pipeline to directly execute x86 instructions. 2. Both the Cortex-A53 and the Core i7 use dynamic multiple issue. 3. The Core i7 microarchitecture has many more registers than x86 requires. 4. The Intel Core i7 uses less than half the pipeline stages of the earlier Intel Pentium 4 Prescott (see Figure 4.57). Check Yourself

 4.14  Advanced Topic: An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language 365.e1 Advanced Topic: An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language to Describe and Model a Pipeline and More Pipelining Illustrations This online section covers hardware description languages and then gives a dozen examples of pipeline diagrams, starting on page 366.e18. As mentioned in Appendix A, Verilog can describe processors for simulation or with the intention that the Verilog specification be synthesized. To achieve acceptable synthesis results in size and speed, and a behavioral specification intended for synthesis must carefully delineate the highly combinational portions of the design, such as a datapath, from the control. The datapath can then be synthesized using available libraries. A Verilog specification intended for synthesis is usually longer and more complex. We start with a behavioral model of the five-stage pipeline. To illustrate the dichotomy between behavioral and synthesizable designs, we then give two Verilog descriptions of a multiple-cycle-per-instruction RISC-V processor: one intended solely for simulations and one suitable for synthesis. Using Verilog for Behavioral Specification with Simulation for the Five-Stage Pipeline Figure e4.14.1 shows a Verilog behavioral description of the pipeline that handles ALU instructions as well as loads and stores. It does not accommodate branches (even incorrectly!), which we postpone including until later in the chapter. Because Verilog lacks the ability to define registers with named fields such as structures in C, we use several independent registers for each pipeline register. We name these registers with a prefix using the same convention; hence, IFIDIR is the IR portion of the IFID pipeline register. This version is a behavioral description not intended for synthesis. Instructions take the same number of clock cycles as our hardware design, but the control is done in a simpler fashion by repeatedly decoding fields of the instruction in each pipe stage. Because of this difference, the instruction register (IR) is needed throughout the pipeline, and the entire IR is passed from pipe stage to pipe stage. As you read the Verilog descriptions in this chapter, remember that the actions in the always block all occur in parallel on every clock cycle. Since there are no blocking assignments, the order of the events within the always block is arbitrary. 4.14

365.e2 4.14  Advanced Topic: An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language module RISCVCPU (clock); // Instruction opcodes parameter LW = 7'b000_0011, SW = 7'b010_0011, BEQ = 7'b110_0011, NOP = 32'h0000_0013, ALUop = 7'b001_0011; input clock; reg [31:0] PC, Regs[0:31], IDEXA, IDEXB, EXMEMB, EXMEMALUOut, MEMWBValue; reg [31:0] IMemory[0:1023], DMemory[0:1023], // separate memories IFIDIR, IDEXIR, EXMEMIR, MEMWBIR; // pipeline registers wire [4:0] IFIDrs1, IFIDrs2, MEMWBrd; // Access register fields wire [6:0] IDEXop, EXMEMop, MEMWBop; // Access opcodes wire [31:0] Ain, Bin; // the ALU inputs // These assignments define fields from the pipeline registers assign IFIDrs1 = IFIDIR[19:15]; // rs1 field assign IFIDrs2 = IFIDIR[24:20]; // rs2 field assign IDEXop = IDEXIR[6:0]; // the opcode assign EXMEMop = EXMEMIR[6:0]; // the opcode assign MEMWBop = MEMWBIR[6:0]; // the opcode assign MEMWBrd = MEMWBIR[11:7]; // rd field // Inputs to the ALU come directly from the ID/EX pipeline registers assign Ain = IDEXA; assign Bin = IDEXB; integer i; // used to initialize registers initial begin PC = 0; IFIDIR = NOP; IDEXIR = NOP; EXMEMIR = NOP; MEMWBIR = NOP; // put NOPs in pipeline registers for (i=0;i<=31;i=i+1) Regs[i] = i; // initialize registers--just so they aren't cares end // Remember that ALL these actions happen every pipe stage and with the use of <= they happen in parallel! always @(posedge clock) begin // first instruction in the pipeline is being fetched // Fetch & increment PC IFIDIR <= IMemory[PC >> 2]; PC <= PC + 4; // second instruction in pipeline is fetching registers IDEXA <= Regs[IFIDrs1]; IDEXB <= Regs[IFIDrs2]; // get two registers IDEXIR <= IFIDIR; // pass along IR--can happen anywhere, since this affects next stage only! // third instruction is doing address calculation or ALU operation if (IDEXop == LW) EXMEMALUOut <= IDEXA + {{53{IDEXIR[31]}}, IDEXIR[30:20]}; else if (IDEXop == SW) EXMEMALUOut <= IDEXA + {{53{IDEXIR[31]}}, IDEXIR [30:25], IDEXIR[11:7]}; else if (IDEXop == ALUop) case (IDEXIR[31:25]) // case for the various R-type instructions 0: EXMEMALUOut <= Ain + Bin; // add operation FIGURE e4.14.1  A Verilog behavioral model for the RISC-V five-stage pipeline, ignoring branch and data hazards. As in the design earlier in Chapter 4, we use separate instruction and data memories, which would be implemented using separate caches as we describe in Chapter 5.

 4.14  Advanced Topic: An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language 365.e3 default: ; // other R-type operations: subtract, SLT, etc. endcase EXMEMIR <= IDEXIR; EXMEMB <= IDEXB; // pass along the IR & B register // Mem stage of pipeline if (EXMEMop == ALUop) MEMWBValue <= EXMEMALUOut; // pass along ALU result else if (EXMEMop == LW) MEMWBValue <= DMemory[EXMEMALUOut >> 2]; else if (EXMEMop == SW) DMemory[EXMEMALUOut >> 2] <= EXMEMB; //store MEMWBIR <= EXMEMIR; // pass along IR // WB stage if (((MEMWBop == LW) || (MEMWBop == ALUop)) && (MEMWBrd != 0)) // update registers if load/ALU operation and destination not 0 Regs[MEMWBrd] <= MEMWBValue; end endmodule FIGURE e4.14.1  A Verilog behavioral model for the RISC-V five-stage pipeline, ignoring branch and data hazards. (Continued) Implementing Forwarding in Verilog To extend the Verilog model further, Figure e4.14.2 shows the addition of forwarding logic for the case when the source and destination are ALU instructions. Neither load stalls nor branches are handled; we will add these shortly. The changes from the earlier Verilog description are highlighted. Someone has proposed moving the write for a result from an ALU instruction from the WB to the MEM stage, pointing out that this would reduce the maximum length of forwards from an ALU instruction by one cycle. Which of the following is accurate reasons not to consider such a change? 1. It would not actually change the forwarding logic, so it has no advantage. 2. It is impossible to implement this change under any circumstance since the write for the ALU result must stay in the same pipe stage as the write for a load result. 3. Moving the write for ALU instructions would create the possibility of writes occurring from two different instructions during the same clock cycle. Either an extra write port would be required on the register file or a structural hazard would be created. 4. The result of an ALU instruction is not available in time to do the write during MEM. Check Yourself The Behavioral Verilog with Stall Detection If we ignore branches, stalls for data hazards in the RISC-V pipeline are confined to one simple case: loads whose results are currently in the WB clock stage. Thus, extending the Verilog to handle a load with a destination that is either an ALU instruction or an effective address calculation is reasonably straightforward, and Figure e4.14.3 shows the few additions needed.

365.e4 4.14  Advanced Topic: An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language module RISCVCPU (clock); // Instruction opcodes parameter LW = 7'b000_0011, SW = 7'b010_0011, BEQ = 7'b110_0011, NOP = 32'h0000_0013, ALUop = 7'b001_0011; input clock; reg [31:0] PC, Regs[0:31], IDEXA, IDEXB, EXMEMB, EXMEMALUOut, MEMWBValue; reg [31:0] IMemory[0:1023], DMemory[0:1023], // separate memories IFIDIR, IDEXIR, EXMEMIR, MEMWBIR; // pipeline registers wire [4:0] IFIDrs1, IFIDrs2, IDEXrs1, IDEXrs2, EXMEMrd, MEMWBrd; // Access register fields wire [6:0] IDEXop, EXMEMop, MEMWBop; // Access opcodes wire [31:0] Ain, Bin; // the ALU inputs // declare the bypass signals wire bypassAfromMEM, bypassAfromALUinWB, bypassBfromMEM, bypassBfromALUinWB, bypassAfromLDinWB, bypassBfromLDinWB; assign IFIDrs1 = IFIDIR[19:15]; assign IFIDrs2 = IFIDIR[24:20]; assign IDEXop = IDEXIR[6:0]; assign IDEXrs1 = IDEXIR[19:15]; assign IDEXrs2 = IDEXIR[24:20]; assign EXMEMop = EXMEMIR[6:0]; assign EXMEMrd = EXMEMIR[11:7]; assign MEMWBop = MEMWBIR[6:0]; assign MEMWBrd = MEMWBIR[11:7]; // The bypass to input A from the MEM stage for an ALU operation assign bypassAfromMEM = (IDEXrs1 == EXMEMrd) && (IDEXrs1 != 0) && (EXMEMop == ALUop); // The bypass to input B from the MEM stage for an ALU operation assign bypassBfromMEM = (IDEXrs2 == EXMEMrd) && (IDEXrs2 != 0) && (EXMEMop == ALUop); // The bypass to input A from the WB stage for an ALU operation assign bypassAfromALUinWB = (IDEXrs1 == MEMWBrd) && (IDEXrs1 != 0) && (MEMWBop == ALUop); // The bypass to input B from the WB stage for an ALU operation assign bypassBfromALUinWB = (IDEXrs2 == MEMWBrd) && (IDEXrs2 != 0) && (MEMWBop == ALUop); // The bypass to input A from the WB stage for an LW operation assign bypassAfromLDinWB = (IDEXrs1 == MEMWBrd) && (IDEXrs1 != 0) && (MEMWBop == LW); // The bypass to input B from the WB stage for an LW operation assign bypassBfromLDinWB = (IDEXrs2 == MEMWBrd) && (IDEXrs2 != 0) && (MEMWBop == LW); // The A input to the ALU is bypassed from MEM if there is a bypass there, // Otherwise from WB if there is a bypass there, and otherwise comes from the IDEX register assign Ain = bypassAfromMEM ? EXMEMALUOut : (bypassAfromALUinWB || bypassAfromLDinWB) ? MEMWBValue : IDEXA; // The B input to the ALU is bypassed from MEM if there is a bypass there, // Otherwise from WB if there is a bypass there, and otherwise comes from the IDEX register FIGURE e4.14.2  A behavioral definition of the five-stage RISC-V pipeline with bypassing to ALU operations and address calculations. The code added to Figure e4.14.1 to handle bypassing is highlighted. Because these bypasses only require changing where the ALU inputs come from, the only changes required are in the combinational logic responsible for selecting the ALU inputs. (Continues on next page)

 4.14  Advanced Topic: An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language 365.e5 assign Bin = bypassBfromMEM ? EXMEMALUOut : (bypassBfromALUinWB || bypassBfromLDinWB) ? MEMWBValue: IDEXB; integer i; // used to initialize registers initial begin PC = 0; IFIDIR = NOP; IDEXIR = NOP; EXMEMIR = NOP; MEMWBIR = NOP; // put NOPs in pipeline registers for (i=0;i<=31;i=i+1) Regs[i] = i; // initialize registers--just so they aren't cares end // Remember that ALL these actions happen every pipe stage and with the use of <= they happen in parallel! always @(posedge clock) begin // first instruction in the pipeline is being fetched // Fetch & increment PC IFIDIR <= IMemory[PC >> 2]; PC <= PC + 4; // second instruction in pipeline is fetching registers IDEXA <= Regs[IFIDrs1]; IDEXB <= Regs[IFIDrs2]; // get two registers IDEXIR <= IFIDIR; // pass along IR--can happen anywhere, since this affects next stage only! // third instruction is doing address calculation or ALU operation if (IDEXop == LW) EXMEMALUOut <= IDEXA + {{53{IDEXIR[31]}}, IDEXIR[30:20]}; else if (IDEXop == SW) EXMEMALUOut <= IDEXA + {{53{IDEXIR[31]}}, IDEXIR[30:25], IDEXIR[11:7]}; else if (IDEXop == ALUop) case (IDEXIR[31:25]) // case for the various R-type instructions 0: EXMEMALUOut <= Ain + Bin; // add operation default: ; // other R-type operations: subtract, SLT, etc. endcase EXMEMIR <= IDEXIR; EXMEMB <= IDEXB; // pass along the IR & B register // Mem stage of pipeline if (EXMEMop == ALUop) MEMWBValue <= EXMEMALUOut; // pass along ALU result else if (EXMEMop == LW) MEMWBValue <= DMemory[EXMEMALUOut >> 2]; else if (EXMEMop == SW) DMemory[EXMEMALUOut >> 2] <= EXMEMB; //store MEMWBIR <= EXMEMIR; // pass along IR // WB stage if (((MEMWBop == LW) || (MEMWBop == ALUop)) && (MEMWBrd != 0)) // update registers if load/ALU operation and destination not 0 Regs[MEMWBrd] <= MEMWBValue; end endmodule FIGURE e4.14.2  A behavioral definition of the five-stage RISC-V pipeline with bypassing to ALU operations and address calculations. (Continued)

module RISCVCPU (clock); // Instruction opcodes parameter LW = 7'b000_0011, SW = 7'b010_0011, BEQ = 7'b110_0011, NOP = 32'h0000_0013, ALUop = 7'b001_0011; input clock; reg [31:0] PC, Regs[0:31], IDEXA, IDEXB, EXMEMB, EXMEMALUOut, MEMWBValue; reg [31:0] IMemory[0:1023], DMemory[0:1023], // separate memories IFIDIR, IDEXIR, EXMEMIR, MEMWBIR; // pipeline registers wire [4:0] IFIDrs1, IFIDrs2, IDEXrs1, IDEXrs2, EXMEMrd, MEMWBrd; // Access register fields wire [6:0] IDEXop, EXMEMop, M EMWBop; // Access opcodes wire [31:0] Ain, Bin; // the ALU inputs // declare the bypass signals wire bypassAfromMEM, bypassAfromALUinWB, bypassBfromMEM, bypassBfromALUinWB, bypassAfromLDinWB, bypassBfromLDinWB; wire stall; // stall signal assign IFIDrs1 = IFIDIR[19:15]; assign IFIDrs2 = IFIDIR[24:20]; assign IDEXop = IDEXIR[6:0]; assign IDEXrs1 = IDEXIR[19:15]; assign IDEXrs2 = IDEXIR[24:20]; assign EXMEMop = EXMEMIR[6:0]; assign EXMEMrd = EXMEMIR[11:7]; assign MEMWBop = MEMWBIR[6:0]; assign MEMWBrd = MEMWBIR[11:7]; // The bypass to input A from the MEM stage for an ALU operation assign bypassAfromMEM = (IDEXrs1 == EXMEMrd) && (IDEXrs1 != 0) && (EXMEMop == ALUop); // The bypass to input B from the MEM stage for an ALU operation assign bypassBfromMEM = (IDEXrs2 == EXMEMrd) && (IDEXrs2 != 0) && (EXMEMop == ALUop); // The bypass to input A from the WB stage for an ALU operation assign bypassAfromALUinWB = (IDEXrs1 == MEMWBrd) && (IDEXrs1 != 0) && (MEMWBop == ALUop); // The bypass to input B from the WB stage for an ALU operation assign bypassBfromALUinWB = (IDEXrs2 == MEMWBrd) && (IDEXrs2 != 0) && (MEMWBop == ALUop); // The bypass to input A from the WB stage for an LW operation assign bypassAfromLDinWB = (IDEXrs1 == MEMWBrd) && (IDEXrs1 != 0) && (MEMWBop == LW); // The bypass to input B from the WB stage for an LW operation assign bypassBfromLDinWB = (IDEXrs2 == MEMWBrd) && (IDEXrs2 != 0) && (MEMWBop == LW); // The A input to the ALU is bypassed from MEM if there is a bypass there, // Otherwise from WB if there is a bypass there, and otherwise comes from the IDEX register assign Ain = bypassAfromMEM ? EXMEMALUOut : (bypassAfromALUinWB || bypassAfromLDinWB) ? MEMWBValue : IDEXA; // The B input to the ALU is bypassed from MEM if there is a bypass there, // Otherwise from WB if there is a bypass there, and otherwise comes from the IDEX register assign Bin = bypassBfromMEM ? EXMEMALUOut : (bypassBfromALUinWB || bypassBfromLDinWB) ? MEMWBValue: IDEXB; FIGURE e4.14.3  A behavioral definition of the five-stage RISC-V pipeline with stalls for loads when the destination is an ALU instruction or effective address calculation. The changes from Figure e4.14.2 are highlighted. (Continues on next page)

// The signal for detecting a stall based on the use of a result from LW assign stall = (MEMWBop == LW) && ( // source instruction is a load (((IDEXop == LW) || (IDEXop == SW)) && (IDEXrs1 == MEMWBrd)) || // stall for address calc ((IDEXop == ALUop) && ((IDEXrs1 == MEMWBrd) || (IDEXrs2 == MEMWBrd)))); // ALU use integer i; // used to initialize registers initial begin PC = 0; IFIDIR = NOP; IDEXIR = NOP; EXMEMIR = NOP; MEMWBIR = NOP; // put NOPs in pipeline registers for (i=0;i<=31;i=i+1) Regs[i] = i; // initialize registers--just so they aren't cares end // Remember that ALL these actions happen every pipe stage and with the use of <= they happen in parallel! always @(posedge clock) begin if (~stall) begin // the first three pipeline stages stall if there is a load hazard // first instruction in the pipeline is being fetched // Fetch & increment PC IFIDIR <= IMemory[PC >> 2]; PC <= PC + 4; // second instruction in pipeline is fetching registers IDEXA <= Regs[IFIDrs1]; IDEXB <= Regs[IFIDrs2]; // get two registers IDEXIR <= IFIDIR; // pass along IR--can happen anywhere, since this affects next stage only! // third instruction is doing address calculation or ALU operation if (IDEXop == LW) EXMEMALUOut <= IDEXA + {{53{IDEXIR[31]}}, IDEXIR[30:20]}; else if (IDEXop == SW) EXMEMALUOut <= IDEXA + {{53{IDEXIR[31]}}, IDEXIR[30:25], IDEXIR[11:7]}; else if (IDEXop == ALUop) case (IDEXIR[31:25]) // case for the various R-type instructions 0: EXMEMALUOut <= Ain + Bin; // add operation default: ; // other R-type operations: subtract, SLT, etc. endcase EXMEMIR <= IDEXIR; EXMEMB <= IDEXB; // pass along the IR & B register end else EXMEMIR <= NOP; // Freeze first three stages of pipeline; inject a nop into the EX output // Mem stage of pipeline if (EXMEMop == ALUop) MEMWBValue <= EXMEMALUOut; // pass along ALU result else if (EXMEMop == LW) MEMWBValue <= DMemory[EXMEMALUOut >> 2]; else if (EXMEMop == SW) DMemory[EXMEMALUOut >> 2] <= EXMEMB; //store MEMWBIR <= EXMEMIR; // pass along IR // WB stage if (((MEMWBop == LW) || (MEMWBop == ALUop)) && (MEMWBrd != 0)) // update registers if load/ALU operation and destination not 0 Regs[MEMWBrd] <= MEMWBValue; end endmodule FIGURE e4.14.3  A behavioral definition of the five-stage RISC-V pipeline with stalls for loads when the destination is an ALU instruction or effective address calculation. (Continued)

365.e8 4.14  Advanced Topic: An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language Implementing the Branch Hazard Logic in Verilog We can extend our Verilog behavioral model to implement the control for branches. We add the code to model branch equal using a “predict not taken” strategy. The Verilog code is shown in Figure e4.14.4. It implements the branch hazard by detecting a taken branch in ID and using that signal to squash the instruction in IF (by setting the IR to 0x00000013, which is an effective NOP in RISC-V); in addition, the PC is assigned to the branch target. Note that to prevent an unexpected latch, it is important that the PC is clearly assigned on every path through the always block; hence, we assign the PC in a single if statement. Lastly, note that although Figure e4.14.4 incorporates the basic logic for branches and control hazards, supporting branches requires additional bypassing and data hazard detection, which we have not included. Using Verilog for Behavioral Specification with Synthesis To demonstrate the contrasting types of Verilog, we show two descriptions of a different, nonpipelined implementation style of RISC-V that uses multiple clock cycles per instruction. (Since some instructors make a synthesizable description of the RISC-V pipeline project for a class, we chose not to include it here. It would also be long.) Figure e4.14.5 gives a behavioral specification of a multicycle implementation of the RISC-V processor. Because of the use of behavioral operations, it would be difficult to synthesize a separate datapath and control unit with any reasonable efficiency. This version demonstrates another approach to the control by using a Mealy finite-state machine (see discussion in Section A.10 of Appendix A). The use of a Mealy machine, which allows the output to depend both on inputs and the current state, allows us to decrease the total number of states. Check Yourself Someone has asked about the possibility of data hazards occurring through memory, contrary to through a register. Which of the following statements about such hazards is true? 1. Since memory accesses only occur in the MEM stage, all memory operations are done in the same order as instruction execution, making such hazards impossible in this pipeline. 2. Such hazards are possible in this pipeline; we just have not discussed them yet. 3. No pipeline can ever have a hazard involving memory, since it is the programmer’s job to keep the order of memory references accurate. 4. Memory hazards may be possible in some pipelines, but they cannot occur in this particular pipeline. 5. Although the pipeline control would be obligated to maintain ordering among memory references to avoid hazards, it is impossible to design a pipeline where the references could be out of order.

// Instruction opcodes parameter LW = 7'b000_0011, SW = 7'b010_0011, BEQ = 7'b110_0011, NOP = 32'h0000_0013, ALUop = 7'b001_0011; input clock; reg [31:0] PC, Regs[0:31], IDEXA, IDEXB, EXMEMB, EXMEMALUOut, MEMWBValue; reg [31:0] IMemory[0:1023], DMemory[0:1023], // separate memories IFIDIR, IDEXIR, EXMEMIR, MEMWBIR; // pipeline registers wire [4:0] IFIDrs1, IFIDrs2, IDEXrs1, IDEXrs2, EXMEMrd, MEMWBrd; // Access register fields wire [6:0] IFIDop, IDEXop, EXMEMop, MEMWBop; // Access opcodes wire [31:0] Ain, Bin; // the ALU inputs // declare the bypass signals wire bypassAfromMEM, bypassAfromALUinWB, bypassBfromMEM, bypassBfromALUinWB, bypassAfromLDinWB, bypassBfromLDinWB; wire stall; // stall signal wire takebranch; assign IFIDop = IFIDIR[6:0]; assign IFIDrs1 = IFIDIR[19:15]; assign IFIDrs2 = IFIDIR[24:20]; assign IDEXop = IDEXIR[6:0]; assign IDEXrs1 = IDEXIR[19:15]; assign IDEXrs2 = IDEXIR[24:20]; assign EXMEMop = EXMEMIR[6:0]; assign EXMEMrd = EXMEMIR[11:7]; assign MEMWBop = MEMWBIR[6:0]; assign MEMWBrd = MEMWBIR[11:7]; // The bypass to input A from the MEM stage for an ALU operation assign bypassAfromMEM = (IDEXrs1 == EXMEMrd) && (IDEXrs1 != 0) && (EXMEMop == ALUop); // The bypass to input B from the MEM stage for an ALU operation assign bypassBfromMEM = (IDEXrs2 == EXMEMrd) && (IDEXrs2 != 0) && (EXMEMop == ALUop); // The bypass to input A from the WB stage for an ALU operation assign bypas sAfromALUinWB = (IDEXrs1 == MEMWBrd) && (IDEXrs1 != 0) && (MEMWBop == ALUop); // The bypass to input B from the WB stage for an ALU operation assign bypassBfromALUinWB = (IDEXrs2 == MEMWBrd) && (IDEXrs2 != 0) && (MEMWBop == ALUop); // The bypass to input A from the WB stage for an LW operation assign bypassAfromLDinWB = (IDEXrs1 == MEMWBrd) && (IDEXrs1 != 0) && (MEMWBop == LW); // The bypass to input B from the WB stage for an LW operation assign bypassBfromLDinWB = (IDEXrs2 == MEMWBrd) && (IDEX rs2 != 0) && (MEMWBop == LW); // The A input to the ALU is bypassed from MEM if there is a bypass there, // Otherwise from WB if there is a bypass there, and otherwise comes from the IDEX register assign Ain = bypassAfromMEM ? EXMEMALUOut : (bypassAfromALUinWB || bypassAfromLDinWB) ? MEMWBValue : IDEXA; // The B input to the ALU is bypassed from MEM if there is a bypass there, // Otherwise from WB if there is a bypass there, and otherwise comes from the IDEX register assign Bin = bypassBfromMEM ? EXMEMALUOut : (bypassBfromALUinWB || bypassBfromLDinWB) ? MEMWBValue: module RISCVCPU (clock); FIGURE e4.14.4  A behavioral definition of the five-stage RISC-V pipeline with stalls for loads when the destination is an ALU instruction or effective address calculation. The changes from Figure e4.14.2 are highlighted. (Continues on next page)

IDEXB; // The signal for detecting a stall based on the use of a result from LW assign stall = (MEMWBop == LW) && ( // source instruction is a load (((IDEXop == LW) || (IDEXop == SW)) && (IDEXrs1 == MEMWBrd)) || // stall for address calc ((IDEXop == ALUop) && ((IDEXrs1 == MEMWBrd) || (IDEXrs2 == MEMWBrd)))); // ALU use // Signal for a taken branch: instruction is BEQ and registers are equal assign takebranch = (IFIDop == BEQ) && (Regs[IFIDrs1] == Regs[IFIDrs2]); integer i; // used to initialize registers initial begin PC = 0; IFIDIR = NOP; IDEXIR = NOP; EXMEMIR = NOP; MEMWBIR = NOP; // put NOPs in pipeline registers for (i=0;i<=31;i=i+1) Regs[i] = i; // initialize registers--just so they aren't cares end // Remember that ALL these actions happen every pipe stage and with the use of <= they happen in parallel! always @(posedge clock) begin if (~stall) begin // the first three pipeline stages stall if there is a load hazard if (~takebranch) begin // first instruction in the pipeline is being fetched normally IFIDIR <= IMemory[PC >> 2]; PC <= PC + 4; end else begin // a taken branch is in ID; instruction in IF is wrong; insert a NOP and reset the PC IFIDIR <= NOP; PC <= PC + {{52{IFIDIR[31]}}, IFIDIR[7], IFIDIR[30:25], IFIDIR[11:8], 1'b0}; end // second instruction in pipeline is fetching registers IDEXA <= Regs[IFIDrs1]; IDEXB <= Regs[IFIDrs2]; // get two registers IDEXIR <= IFIDIR; // pass along IR--can happen anywhere, since this affects next stage only! // third instruction is doing addre ss calculation or ALU operation if (IDEXop == LW) EXMEMALUOut <= IDEXA + {{53{IDEXIR[31]}}, IDEXIR[30:20]}; else if (IDEXop == SW) EXMEMALUOut <= IDEXA + {{53{IDEXIR[31]}}, IDEXIR[30:25], IDEXIR[11:7]}; else if (IDEXop == ALUop) case (IDEXIR[31:25]) // case for the various R-type instructions 0: EXMEMALUOut <= Ain + Bin; // add operation FIGURE e4.14.4  A behavioral definition of the five-stage RISC-V pipeline with stalls for loads when the destination is an ALU instruction or effective address calculation. (Continued)

 4.14  Advanced Topic: An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language 365.e11 endcase EXMEMIR <= IDEXIR; EXMEMB <= IDEXB; // pass along the IR & B register end else EXMEMIR <= NOP; // Freeze first three stages of pipeline; inject a nop into the EX output // Mem stage of pipeline if (EXMEMop == ALUop) MEMWBValue <= EXMEMALUOut; // pass along ALU result else if (EXMEMop == LW) MEMWBValue <= DMemory[EXMEMALUOut >> 2]; else if (EXMEMop == SW) DMemory[EXMEMALUOut >> 2] <= EXMEMB; //store MEMWBIR <= EXMEMIR; // pass along IR // WB stage if (((MEMWBop == LW) || (MEMWBop == ALUop)) && (MEM WBrd != 0)) // update registers if load/ALU operation and destination not 0 Regs[MEMWBrd] <= MEMWBValue; end endmodule default: ; // other R-type operations: subtract, SLT, etc. FIGURE e4.14.4  A behavioral definition of the five-stage RISC-V pipeline with stalls for loads when the destination is an ALU instruction or effective address calculation. (Continued) Since a version of the RISC-V design intended for synthesis is considerably more complex, we have relied on a number of Verilog modules that were specified in Appendix A, including the following: ■ The 4-to-1 multiplexor shown in Figure A.4.2, and the 2-to-1 multiplexor that can be trivially derived based on the 4-to-1 multiplexor. ■ The RISC-V ALU shown in Figure A.5.15. ■ The RISC-V ALU control defined in Figure A.5.16. ■ The RISC-V register file defined in Figure A.8.11. Now, let’s look at a Verilog version of the RISC-V processor intended for synthesis. Figure e4.14.6 shows the structural version of the RISC-V datapath. Figure e4.14.7 uses the datapath module to specify the RISC-V CPU. This version also demonstrates another approach to implementing the control unit, as well as some optimizations that rely on relationships between various control signals. Observe that the state machine specification only provides the sequencing actions. The setting of the control lines is done with a series of assign statements that depend on the state as well as the opcode field of the instruction register. If one were to fold the setting of the control into the state specification, this would look like a Mealy-style finite-state control unit. Because the setting of the control lines is specified using assign statements outside of the always block, most logic synthesis systems will generate a small implementation of a finite-state machine 

365.e12 4.14  Advanced Topic: An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language module RISCVCPU (clock); parameter LW = 7'b000_0011, SW = 7'b010_0011, BEQ = 7'b110_0011, ALUop = 7'b001_0011; input clock; //the clock is an external input // The architecturally visible registers and scratch registers for implementation reg [31:0] PC, Regs[0:31], ALUOut, MDR, A, B; reg [31:0] Memory [0:1023], IR; reg [2:0] state; // processor state wire [6:0] opcode; // use to get opcode easily wire [31:0] ImmGen; // used to generate immediate assign opcode = IR[6:0]; // opcode is lower 7 bits assign ImmGen = (opcode == LW) ? {{53{IR[31]}}, IR[30:20]} : /* (opcode == SW) */{{53{IR[31]}}, IR[30:25], IR[11:7]}; assign PCOffset = {{52{IR[31]}}, IR[7], IR[30:25], IR[11:8], 1'b0}; // set the PC to 0 and start the control in state 1 initial begin PC = 0; state = 1; end // The state machine--triggered on a rising clock always @(posedge clock) begin Regs[0] <= 0; // shortcut way to make sure R0 is always 0 case (state) //action depends on the state 1: begin // first step: fetch the instruction, increment PC, go to next state IR <= Memory[PC >> 2]; PC <= PC + 4; state <= 2; // next state end 2: begin // second step: Instruction decode, register fetch, also compute branch address A <= Regs[IR[19:15]]; B <= Regs[IR[24:20]]; ALUOut <= PC + PCOffset; // compute PC-relative branch target state <= 3; end 3: begin // third step: Load-store execution, ALU execution, Branch completion if ((opcode == LW) || (opcode == SW)) begin ALUOut <= A + ImmGen; // compute effective address state <= 4; end else if (opcode == ALUop) begin case (IR[31:25]) // case for the various R-type instructions 0: ALUOut <= A + B; // add operation default: ; // other R-type operations: subtract, SLT, etc. endcase state <= 4; end else if (opcode == BEQ) begin if (A == B) begin PC <= ALUOut; // branch taken--update PC end FIGURE e4.14.5  A behavioral specification of the multicycle RISC-V design. This has the same cycle behavior as the multicycle design, but is purely for simulation and specification. It cannot be used for synthesis. (Continues on next page)

 4.14  Advanced Topic: An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language 365.e13 state <= 1; end else ; // other opcodes or exception for undefined instruction would go here end 4: begin if (opcode == ALUop) begin // ALU Operation Regs[IR[11:7]] <= ALUOut; // write the result state <= 1; end // R-type finishes else if (opcode == LW) begin // load instruction MDR <= Memory[ALUOut >> 2]; // read the memory state <= 5; // next state end else if (opcode == SW) begin // store instruction Memory[ALUOut >> 2] <= B; // write the memory state <= 1; // return to state 1 end else ; // other instructions go here end 5: begin // LW is the only instruction still in execution Regs[IR[11:7]] <= MDR; // write the MDR to the register state <= 1; end // complete an LW instruction endcase end endmodule FIGURE e4.14.5  A behavioral specification of the multicycle RISC-V design. (Continued) that determines the setting of the state register and then uses external logic to derive the control inputs to the datapath. In writing this version of the control, we have also taken advantage of a number of insights about the relationship between various control signals as well as situations where we don’t care about the control signal value; some examples of these are given in the following elaboration. More Illustrations of Instruction Execution on the Hardware To reduce the cost of this book, starting with the third edition, we moved sections and figures that were used by a minority of instructors online. This subsection recaptures those figures for readers who would like more supplemental material to understand pipelining better. These are all single-clock-cycle pipeline diagrams, which take many figures to illustrate the execution of a sequence of instructions. The three examples are respectively for code with no hazards, an example of forwarding on the pipelined implementation, and an example of bypassing on the pipelined implementation.

module Datapath (ALUOp, MemtoReg, MemRead, MemWrite, IorD, RegWrite, IRWrite, PCWrite, PCWriteCond, ALUSrcA, ALUSrcB, PCSource, opcode, clock); // the control inputs + clock parameter LW = 7'b000_0011, SW = 7'b010_0011; input [1:0] ALUOp, ALUSrcB; // 2-bit control signals input MemtoReg, MemRead, MemWrite, IorD, RegWrite, IRWrite, PCWrite, PCWriteCond, ALUSrcA, PCSource, clock; // 1-bit control signals output [6:0] opcode; // opcode is needed as an output by control reg [31:0] PC, MDR, ALUOut; // CPU state + some temporaries reg [31:0] Memory[0:1023], IR; // CPU state + some temporaries wire [31:0] A, B, SignExtendOffset, PCOffset, ALUResultOut, PCValue, JumpAddr, Writedata, ALUAin, ALUBin, MemOut; // these are signals derived from registers wire [3:0] ALUCtl; // the ALU control lines wire Zero; // the Zero out signal from the ALU initial PC = 0; //start the PC at 0 //Combinational signals used in the datapath // Read using word address with either ALUOut or PC as the address source assign MemOut = MemRead ? Memory[(IorD ? ALUOut : PC) >> 2] : 0; assign opcode = IR[6:0]; // opcode shortcut // Get the write register data either from the ALUOut or from the MDR assign Writedata = MemtoReg ? MDR : ALUOut; // Generate immediate assign ImmGen = (opcode == LW) ? {{53{IR[31]}}, IR[30:20]} : /* (opcode == SW) */{{53{IR[31]}}, IR[30:25], IR[11:7]}; // Generate pc offset for branches assign PCOffset = {{52{IR[31]}}, IR[7], IR[30:25], IR[11:8], 1'b0}; // The A input to the ALU is either the rs register or the PC assign ALUAin = ALUSrcA ? A : PC; // ALU input is PC or A // Creates an instance of the ALU control unit (see the module defined in Figure B.5.16 // Input ALUOp is control-unit set and used to describe the instruction class as in Chapter 4 // Input IR[31:25] is the function code field for an ALU instruction // Output ALUCtl are the actual ALU control bits as in Chapter 4 ALUControl alucontroller (ALUOp, IR[31:25], ALUCtl); // ALU control unit // Creates a 2-to-1 multiplexor used to select the source of the next PC // Inputs are ALUResultOut (the incremented PC), ALUOut (the branch address) // PCSource is the selector input and PCValue is the multiplexor output Mult2to1 PCdatasrc (ALUResultOut, ALUOut, PCSource, PCValue); // Creates a 4-to-1 multiplexor used to select the B input of the ALU // Inputs are register B, constant 4, generated immediate, PC offset // ALUSrcB is the select or input // ALUBin is the multiplexor output Mult4to1 ALUBinput (B, 32'd4, ImmGen, PCOffset, ALUSrcB, ALUBin); // Creates a RISC-V ALU // Inputs are ALUCtl (the ALU control), ALU value inputs (ALUAin, ALUBin) // Outputs are ALUResultOut (the 32-bit output) and Zero (zero detection output) RISCVALU ALU (ALUCtl, ALUAin, ALUBin, ALUResultOut, Zero); // the ALU FIGURE e4.14.6  A Verilog version of the multicycle RISC-V datapath that is appropriate for synthesis. This datapath relies on several units from Appendix A. Initial statements do not synthesize, and a version used for synthesis would have to incorporate a reset signal that had this effect. Also note that resetting R0 to 0 on every clock is not the best way to ensure that R0 stays at 0; instead, modifying the register file module to produce 0 whenever R0 is read and to ignore writes to R0 would be a more efficient solution. (Continues on next page)

 4.14  Advanced Topic: An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language 365.e15 // Creates a RISC-V register file // Inputs are the rs1 and rs2 fields of the IR used to specify which registers to read, // Writereg (the write register number), Writedata (the data to be written), // RegWrite (indicates a write), the clock // Outputs are A and B, the registers read registerfile regs (IR[19:15], IR[24:20], IR[11:7], Writedata, RegWrite, A, B, clock); // Register file // The clock-triggered actions of the datapath always @(posedge clock) begin if (MemWrite) Memory[ALUOut >> 2] <= B; // Write memory--must be a store ALUOut <= ALUResultOut; // Save the ALU result for use on a later clock cycle if (IRWrite) IR <= MemOut; // Write the IR if an instruction fetch MDR <= MemOut; // Always save the memory read value // The PC is written both conditionally (controlled by PCWrite) and unconditionally end endmodule FIGURE e4.14.6  A Verilog version of the multicycle RISC-V datapath that is appropriate for synthesis. (Continued) No Hazard Illustrations On page 285, we gave the example code sequence: lw x10, 40(x1) sub x11, x2, x3 add x12, x3, x4 lw x13, 48(x1) add x14, x5, x6 Figures 4.59 and 4.60 showed the multiple-clock-cycle pipeline diagrams for this two-instruction sequence executing across six clock cycles. Figures e4.14.8 through e4.14.10 show the corresponding single-clock-cycle pipeline diagrams for these two instructions. Note that the order of the instructions differs between these two types of diagrams: the newest instruction is at the bottom and to the right of the multiple-clock- cycle pipeline diagram, and it is on the left in the single-clock-cycle pipeline diagram. More Examples To understand how pipeline control works, let’s consider these five instructions going through the pipeline: lw x10, 40(x1) sub x11, x2, x3 and x12, x4, x5 or x13, x6, x7 add x14, x8, x9

365.e16 4.14  Advanced Topic: An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language module RISCVCPU (clock); parameter LW = 7'b000_0011, SW = 7'b010_0011, BEQ = 7'b110_0011, ALUop = 7'b001_0011; input clock; reg [2:0] state; wire [1:0] ALUOp, ALUSrcB; wire [6:0] opcode; wire MemtoReg, MemRead, MemWrite, IorD, RegWrite, IRWrite, PCWrite, PCWriteCond, ALUSrcA, PCSource, MemoryOp; // Create an instance of the RISC-V datapath, the inputs are the control signals; opcode is only output Datapath RISCVDP (ALUOp, MemtoReg, MemRead, MemWrite, IorD, RegWrite, IRWrite, PCWrite, PCWriteCond, ALUSrcA, ALUSrcB, PCSource, opcode, clock); initial begin state = 1; end // start the state machine in state 1 // These are the definitions of the control signals assign MemoryOp = (opcode == LW) || (opcode == SW); // a memory operation assign ALUOp = ((state == 1) || (state == 2) || ((state == 3) && MemoryOp)) ? 2'b00 : // add ((state == 3) && (opcode == BEQ)) ? 2'b01 : 2'b10; // subtract or use function code assign MemtoReg = ((state == 4) && (opcode == ALUop)) ? 0 : 1; assign MemRead = (state == 1) || ((state == 4) && (opcode == LW)); assign MemWrite = (state == 4) && (opcode == SW); assign IorD = (state == 1) ? 0 : 1; assign RegWrite = (state == 5) || ((state == 4) && (opcode == ALUop)); assign IRWrite = (state == 1); assign PCWrite = (state == 1); assign PCWriteCond = (state == 3) && (opcode == BEQ); assign ALUSrcA = ((state == 1) || (state == 2)) ? 0 : 1; assign ALUSrcB = ((state == 1) || ((state == 3) && (opcode == BEQ))) ? 2'b01 : (state == 2) ? 2'b11 : ((state == 3) && MemoryOp) ? 2'b10 : 2'b00; // memory operation or other assign PCSource = (state == 1) ? 0 : 1; // Here is the state machine, which only has to sequence states always @(posedge clock) begin // all state updates on a positive clock edge case (state) 1: state <= 2; // unconditional next state 2: state <= 3; // unconditional next state 3: state <= (opcode == BEQ) ? 1 : 4; // branch go back else next state 4: state <= (opcode == LW) ? 5 : 1; // R-type and LW finish 5: state <= 1; // go back endcase end endmodule FIGURE e4.14.7  The RISC-V CPU using the datapath from Figure e4.14.6.

 4.14  Advanced Topic: An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language 365.e17 Instruction memory Address Instruction IF/ID EX/MEM MEM/WB Add Add PC Registers Read data 1 Read data 2 Read register 1 Read register 2 Write register Write data ID/EX Instruction decode lw x10, 40(x1) Instruction fetch sub x11, x2, x3 Instruction memory Address Add Sum Instruction IF/ID EX/MEM PC Write data Registers Read data 1 Read data 2 Read register 1 Read register 2 Write register Write data Read data ALU result ALU Zero Add Sum ALU result ALU Zero ID/EX Instruction fetch lw x10, 40(x1) Address Data memory Write data Read data Address Data memory Clock 1 Clock 2 M u x M u x M u x M u x M u x M u x MEM/WB FIGURE e4.14.8  Single-cycle pipeline diagrams for clock cycles 1 (top diagram) and 2 (bottom diagram). This style of pipeline representation is a snapshot of every instruction executing during one clock cycle. Our example has but two instructions, so at most two stages are identified in each clock cycle; normally, all five stages are occupied. The highlighted portions of the datapath are active in that clock cycle. The load is fetched in clock cycle 1 and decoded in clock cycle 2, with the subtract fetched in the second clock cycle. To make the figures easier to understand, the other pipeline stages are empty, but normally there is an instruction in every pipeline stage.

365.e18 4.14  Advanced Topic: An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language Instruction memory Address Instruction IF/ID EX/MEM MEM/WB Add Add Registers Read data 1 Read data 2 Read register 1 Read register 2 Write register Write data ID/EX Memory lw x10, x1(40) Execution sub x11, x2, x3 Instruction memory Address Add Sum Add Sum Instruction IF/ID EX/MEM MEM/WB PC PC Write data Registers Read data 1 Read data 2 Read register 1 Read register 2 Write register Write data Read data ALU result ALU Zero ALU result ALU Zero ID/EX Address Data memory Write data Read data Address Data memory Clock 3 Clock 4 M u x M u x M u x M u x M u x M u x Instruction decode sub x11, x2, x3 Execution lw x10, 40(x1) FIGURE e4.14.9  Single-cycle pipeline diagrams for clock cycles 3 (top diagram) and 4 (bottom diagram). In the third clock cycle in the top diagram, lw enters the EX stage. At the same time, sub enters ID. In the fourth clock cycle (bottom datapath), lw moves into MEM stage, reading memory using the address found in EX/MEM at the beginning of clock cycle 4. At the same time, the ALU subtracts and then places the difference into EX/MEM at the end of the clock cycle.

 4.14  Advanced Topic: An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language 365.e19 Instruction memory Address Instruction IF/ID EX/MEM MEM/WB Add Add Registers Read data 1 Read data 2 Read register 1 Read register 2 Imm Gen Write register Write data ID/EX Instruction memory Address Add Sum Instruction IF/ID EX/MEM MEM/WB Write data Registers Read data 1 Read data 2 Read register 1 Read register 2 Write register Write data Read data ALU result ALU Zero ALU result ALU Zero ID/EX Address Data memory Write data Read data Address Data memory Clock 5 Clock 6 M u x M u x M u x M u x M u x M u x Memory sub x11, x2, x3 Write back lw x10, 40(x1) Write back sub x11, x2, x3 Imm Gen Add Sum PC PC FIGURE e4.14.10  Single-cycle pipeline diagrams for clock cycles 5 (top diagram) and 6 (bottom diagram). In clock cycle 5, lw completes by writing the data in MEM/WB into register 10, and sub sends the difference in EX/MEM to MEM/WB. In the next clock cycle, sub writes the value in MEM/WB to register 11.

365.e20 4.14  Advanced Topic: An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language Figures e4.14.11 through e4.14.15 show these instructions proceeding through the nine clock cycles it takes them to complete execution, highlighting what is active in a stage and identifying the instruction associated with each stage during a clock cycle. If you examine them carefully, you may notice: ■ In Figure e4.14.13 you can see the sequence of the destination register numbers from left to right at the bottom of the pipeline registers. The numbers advance to the right during each clock cycle, with the MEM/WB pipeline register supplying the number of the register written during the WB stage. ■ When a stage is inactive, the values of control lines that are deasserted are shown as 0 or X (for don’t care). ■ Sequencing of control is embedded in the pipeline structure itself. First, all instructions take the same number of clock cycles, so there is no special control for instruction duration. Second, all control information is computed during instruction decode and then passed along by the pipeline registers. Forwarding Illustrations We can use the single-clock-cycle pipeline diagrams to show how forwarding operates, as well as how the control activates the forwarding paths. Consider the following code sequence in which the dependences have been highlighted: sub  x2, x1, x3 and  x4, x2, x5 or   x4, x4, x2 add  x9, x4, x2 Figures e4.14.16 and e4.14.17 show the events in clock cycles 3–6 in the execution of these instructions. Thus, in clock cycle 5, the forwarding unit selects the EX/MEM pipeline register for the upper input to the ALU and the MEM/WB pipeline register for the lower input to the ALU. The following add instruction reads both register x4, the target of the and instruction, and register x2, which the sub instruction has already written. Notice that the prior two instructions both write register x4, so the forwarding unit must pick the immediately preceding one (MEM stage). In clock cycle 6, the forwarding unit thus selects the EX/MEM pipeline register, containing the result of the or instruction, for the upper ALU input but uses the non-forwarding register value for the lower input to the ALU. Illustrating Pipelines with Stalls and Forwarding We can use the single-clock-cycle pipeline diagrams to show how the control for stalls works. Figures e4.14.18 through e4.14.20 show the single-cycle diagram for clocks 2 through 7 for the following code sequence (dependences highlighted): lw x2, 40(x1) and x4, x2, x5 or x4, x4, x2 add x9, x4, x2

 4.14  Advanced Topic: An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language 365.e21 Instruction [30, 14–12] MemtoReg Branch ALUSrc Instruction [31–0] RegWrite Instruction [11–7] Instruction IF/ID EX/MEM ID/EX ID: before<1> EX: before<2> MEM: before<3> WB: before<4> MEM/WB IF: lw x10, 40(x1) lw x10, 40(x1) MemtoReg ALUOp Branch ALUSrc ALU control RegWrite Instruction IF/ID ID: EX: before<1> MEM: before<2> WB: before<3> MEM/WB IF: sub x11, x2, x3 ld X Instruction [30, 14–12] Instruction [31–0] Instruction [11–7] X x1 MemWrite MemWrite Clock 2 Clock 1 M u x M u x M u x M u x M u x M u x Add Add Instruction memory Address Instruction memory Address Registers Read data 1 Read data 2 Read register 1 Read register 2 Write register Registers Read data 1 Read data 2 Read register 1 Read register 2 Write register Write data Write data Write data Read data ALU result ALU Zero Address Data memory Write data Read data Address Data memory Imm Gen EX/MEM ID/EX ALU result ALU Zero Add Sum Add Sum Imm Gen FIGURE e4.14.11  Clock cycles 1 and 2. The phrase “before <i>” means the ith instruction before lw. The lw instruction in the top datapath is in the IF stage. At the end of the clock cycle, the lw instruction is in the IF/ID pipeline registers. In the second clock cycle, seen in the bottom datapath, the lw moves to the ID stage, and sub enters in the IF stage. Note that the values of the instruction fields and the selected source registers are shown in the ID stage. Hence, register x1 and the constant 40, the operands of lw, are written into the ID/EX pipeline register. The number 10, representing the destination register number of lw, is also placed in ID/EX. The top of the ID/EX pipeline register shows the control values for ld to be used in the remaining stages. These control values can be read from the lw row of the table in Figure 4.22.

365.e22 4.14  Advanced Topic: An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language Instruction [30, 14–12] MemtoReg ALUOp Branch ALUSrc Instruction [31–0] RegWrite MemRead Control Instruction [11–7] EX M WB M WB WB Instruction IF/ID EX/MEM ID/EX ID: sub x11, x2, x3 EX: lw x10, ... MEM: before<1> WB: before<2> MEM/WB IF: and x12, x4, x5 PC WB EX M MemtoReg ALUOp Branch ALUSrc ALU control ALU control RegWrite WB WB Instruction IF/ID ID: and x12, x4, x5 EX: sub x11, ... MEM: lw x10, ... WB: before<1> MEM/WB IF: or x13, x6, x7 PC and Control Instruction [30, 14–12] Instruction [31–0] Instruction [11–7] X x5 x4 x3 x2 MemWrite MemRead MemWrite Clock 4 Clock 3 M u x M u x M u x M u x M u x M u x Add Add Instruction memory Address Instruction memory Address Registers Read data 1 Read data 2 Read register 1 Read register 2 Write register Registers Read data 1 Read data 2 Read register 1 Read register 2 Write register Write data Write data Add Sum Write data Read data ALU result ALU Zero Add Sum Address Data memory Write data Read data Address Data memory Imm Gen Imm Gen EX/MEM ID/EX ALU result ALU Zero x3 x2 x1 X M sub FIGURE e4.14.12  Clock cycles 3 and 4. In the top diagram, lw enters the EX stage in the third clock cycle, adding x1 and 40 to form the address in the EX/MEM pipeline register. (The lw instruction is written lw x10, … upon reaching EX, because the identity of instruction operands is not needed by EX or the subsequent stages. In this version of the pipeline, the actions of EX, MEM, and WB depend only on the instruction and its destination register or its target address.) At the same time, sub enters ID, reading registers x2 and x3, and the and instruction starts IF. In the fourth clock cycle (bottom datapath), lw moves into MEM stage, reading memory using the value in EX/ MEM as the address. In the same clock cycle, the ALU subtracts x3 from x2 and places the difference into EX/MEM, reads registers x4 and x5 during ID, and the or instruction enters IF. The two diagrams show the control signals being created in the ID stage and peeled off as they are used in subsequent pipe stages.

 4.14  Advanced Topic: An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language 365.e23 Instruction [30, 14–12] MemtoReg ALUOp Branch ALUSrc Instruction [31–0] RegWrite MemRead Control Instruction [11–7] EX M WB M WB WB Instruction IF/ID or EX/MEM ID/EX ID: or x13, x6, x7 EX: and x12, ... MEM: sub x11, ... WB: lw x10, ... MEM/WB IF: add x14, x8, x9 PC WB EX M MemtoReg ALUOp Branch ALUSrc ALU control ALU control RegWrite M WB WB Instruction IF/ID ID: add x14, x8, x9 EX: or x13, ... MEM: and x12, ... WB: sub x11, ... MEM/WB IF: after<1> PC add Control Instruction [30, 14–12] Instruction [31–0] Instruction [11–7] X x9 x8 x7 x6 MemWrite MemRead MemWrite Clock 6 Clock 5 M u x M u x M u x M u x M u x M u x Add Add Instruction memory Address Instruction memory Address Registers Read data 1 Read data 2 Read register 1 Read register 2 Write register Registers Read data 1 Read data 2 Read register 1 Read register 2 Write register Write data Write data Add Sum Write data Read data ALU result ALU Zero Add Sum Address Data memory Write data Read data Address Data memory Imm Gen Imm Gen EX/MEM ID/EX ALU result ALU Zero x5 x4 x7 x6 X FIGURE e4.14.13  Clock cycles 5 and 6. With add, the final instruction in this example, entering IF in the top datapath, all instructions are engaged. By writing the data in MEM/WB into register 10, lw completes; both the data and the register number are in MEM/WB. In the same clock cycle, sub sends the difference in EX/MEM to MEM/WB, and the rest of the instructions move forward. In the next clock cycle, sub selects the value in MEM/WB to write to register number 11, again found in MEM/WB. The remaining instructions play follow-the- leader: the ALU calculates the OR of x6 and x7 for the or instruction in the EX stage, and registers x8 and x9 are read in the ID stage for the add instruction. The instructions after add are shown as inactive just to emphasize what occurs for the five instructions in the example. The phrase “after <i>” means the ith instruction after add.

365.e24 4.14  Advanced Topic: An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language Instruction [30, 14–12] MemtoReg ALUOp Branch ALUSrc Instruction [31–0] ALU control RegWrite MemRead Control Instruction [11–7] EX M WB M WB WB Instruction IF/ID EX/MEM ID/EX ID: after<1> EX: add x14, ... MEM: or x13, ... WB: and x12, ... MEM/WB IF: after<2> PC WB EX M MemtoReg ALUOp Branch ALUSrc ALU control RegWrite M WB WB Instruction IF/ID ID: after<2> EX: after<1> MEM: add x14, ... WB: or x13, ... MEM/WB IF: after<3> PC Control Instruction [30, 14–12] Instruction [31–0] Instruction [11–7] MemWrite MemRead MemWrite Clock 8 Clock 7 M u x M u x M u x M u x M u x M u x Add Add Instruction memory Address Instruction memory Address Registers Read data 1 Read data 2 Read register 1 Read register 2 Write register Registers Read data 1 Read data 2 Read register 1 Read register 2 Write register Write data Add Sum Write data Read data ALU result ALU Zero Add Sum Address Data memory Write data Read data Address Data memory Imm Gen Imm Gen EX/MEM ID/EX ALU result ALU Zero x8 x9 Write data FIGURE e4.14.14  Clock cycles 7 and 8. In the top datapath, the add instruction brings up the rear, adding the values corresponding to registers x8 and x9 during the EX stage. The result of the or instruction is passed from EX/MEM to MEM/WB in the MEM stage, and the WB stage writes the result of the and instruction in MEM/WB to register x12. Note that the control signals are deasserted (set to 0) in the ID stage, since no instruction is being executed. In the following clock cycle (lower drawing), the WB stage writes the result to register x13, thereby completing or, and the MEM stage passes the sum from the add in EX/MEM to MEM/WB. The instructions after add are shown as inactive for pedagogical reasons.

 4.14  Advanced Topic: An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language 365.e25 WB EX M MemtoReg ALUOp Branch ALUSrc ALU control RegWrite M WB WB Instruction IF/ID ID: after<3> EX: after<2> MEM: after<1> WB: add x14, ... MEM/WB IF: after<4> PC Control Instruction [30, 14–12] Instruction [31–0] Instruction [11–7] MemRead MemWrite Clock 9 M u x M u x M u x Add Instruction memory Address Registers Read data 1 Read data 2 Read register 1 Read register 2 Write register Write data Add Sum Write data Read data Address Data memory Imm Gen EX/MEM ID/EX ALU result ALU Zero FIGURE e4.14.15  Clock cycle 9. The WB stage writes the ALU result in MEM/WB into register x14, completing add and the five- instruction sequence. The instructions after add are shown as inactive for pedagogical reasons.

365.e26 4.14  Advanced Topic: An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language PC Instruction memory Registers M u x M u x EX M WB WB Data memory M u x Forwarding unit Instruction IF/ID and x4, x2, x5 sub x2, x1, x3 ID/EX before<1> EX/MEM before<2> MEM/WB or x4, x4, x2 Clock 3 x2 x5 x1 x3 Control ALU M WB PC Instruction memory Registers M u x M u x EX M WB Data memory M u x Forwarding unit Instruction IF/ID or x4, x4, x2 and x4, x2, x5 ID/EX sub X2, ... EX/MEM before<1> MEM/WB add x9, x4, x2 Clock 4 x4 x2 x2 x5 Control ALU M WB WB FIGURE e4.14.16  Clock cycles 3 and 4 of the instruction sequence on page 366.e26. The bold lines are those active in a clock cycle, and the italicized register numbers in color indicate a hazard. The forwarding unit is highlighted by shading it when it is forwarding data to the ALU. The instructions before sub are shown as inactive just to emphasize what occurs for the four instructions in the example. Operand names are used in EX for control of forwarding; thus they are included in the instruction label for EX. Operand names are not needed in MEM or WB, so … is used. Compare this with Figures e4.14.12 through e4.14.15, which show the datapath without forwarding where ID is the last stage to need operand information.

 4.14  Advanced Topic: An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language 365.e27 PC Instruction memory Registers Control M u x Data memory M u x M u x ALU Instruction IF/ID add x9, x4, x2 or x4, x4, x2 ID/EX and x4,... EX/MEM sub x2, .. MEM/WB after<1> Clock 5 x2 x4 x2 x4 after<1> after<2> add x9, x4, x2 or x4, ... EX/MEM and x4, .. MEM/WB ID/EX EX WB M WB WB M Forwarding unit PC Instruction memory Registers Control M u x M u x Data memory M u ALU x Instruction IF/ID Clock 6 x2 x4 EX WB M WB WB M Forwarding unit FIGURE e4.14.17  Clock cycles 5 and 6 of the instruction sequence on page 366.e26. The forwarding unit is highlighted when it is forwarding data to the ALU. The two instructions after add are shown as inactive just to emphasize what occurs for the four instructions in the example. The bold lines are those active in a clock cycle, and the italicized register numbers in color indicate a hazard.

365.e28 4.14  Advanced Topic: An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language Registers Instruction ID/EX Control PC Instruction memory PC Instruction memory Hazard detection unit M u x IF/IDWrite PCWrite IF/IDWrite PCWrite ID/EX.RegisterRd before<3> Registers M u x EX M WB M WB Data memory M u x Instruction IF/ID lw x2, 40(x1) ID/EX before<2> EX/MEM MEM/WB Clock 2 X X x1 XX X Control ALU WB lw x2, 40(x1) before<1> before<2> or x4, x4, x2 and x4, x2, x5 and x4, x2, x5 Clock 3 M u x M u x EX M WB M WB Data memory M u x Forwarding unit Forwarding unit EX/MEM MEM/WB x1 XX X x5 x2 ALU WB Hazard detection unit M u x ID/EX.RegisterRd before<1> ID/EX.MemRead ID/EX.MemRead M u x IF/ID FIGURE e4.14.18  Clock cycles 2 and 3 of the instruction sequence on page 366.e26 with a load replacing sub. The bold lines are those active in a clock cycle, the italicized register numbers in color indicate a hazard, and the … in the place of operands means that their identity is information not needed by that stage. The values of the significant control lines, registers, and register numbers are labeled in the figures. The and instruction wants to read the value created by the lw instruction in clock cycle 3, so the hazard detection unit stalls the and and or instructions. Hence, the hazard detection unit is highlighted.

 4.14  Advanced Topic: An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language 365.e29 Registers Instruction ID/EX Control PC Instruction memory PC Instruction memory Hazard detection unit M u x IF/IDWrite PCWrite IF/IDWrite PCWrite ID/EX.RegisterRd before<1> Registers M u x EX M WB M WB Data memory M u x Instruction IF/ID and x4, x2, x5 ID/EX lw x2,... EX/MEM MEM/WB Clock 4 x2 x5 x2 x5 Control ALU WB and x4, x2, x5 Bubble lw x2,... add x9, x4, x2 or x4, x4, x2 or x4, x4, x2 Clock 5 M u x M u x EX M WB M WB Data memory M u x Forwarding unit Forwarding unit EX/MEM MEM/WB x2 x5 x2 x4 ALU WB Hazard detection unit M u x ID/EX.RegisterRd Bubble ID/EX.MemRead ID/EX.MemRead M u x IF/ID FIGURE e4.14.19  Clock cycles 4 and 5 of the instruction sequence on page 366.e26 with a load replacing sub. The bubble is inserted in the pipeline in clock cycle 4, and then the and instruction is allowed to proceed in clock cycle 5. The forwarding unit is highlighted in clock cycle 5 because it is forwarding data from lw to the ALU. Note that in clock cycle 4, the forwarding unit forwards the address of the lw as if it were the contents of register x2; this is rendered harmless by the insertion of the bubble. The bold lines are those active in a clock cycle, and the italicized register numbers in color indicate a hazard.

365.e30 4.14  Advanced Topic: An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language Registers Instruction ID/EX Control PC Instruction memory PC Instruction memory Hazard detection unit M u x IF/IDWrite PCWrite IF/IDWrite PCWrite ID/EX.RegisterRd Bubble Registers M u x EX M WB M WB Data memory M u x Instruction IF/ID add x9, x4, x2 ID/EX and x4, ... EX/MEM MEM/WB Clock 6 Clock 7 x4 x2 x4 x2 Control ALU WB add x9, x4, x2 or x4, ... and x4, ... after<2> after<1> after<1> M u x M u x EX M WB M WB Data memory M u x Forwarding unit Forwarding unit EX/MEM MEM/WB x4 x2 ALU WB Hazard detection unit M u x ID/EX.RegisterRd or x4, x4, x2 ID/EX.MemRead ID/EX.MemRead M u x IF/ID FIGURE e4.14.20  Clock cycles 6 and 7 of the instruction sequence on page 366.e26 with a load replacing sub. Note that unlike in Figure e4.14.17, the stall allows the lw to complete, and so there is no forwarding from MEM/WB in clock cycle 6. Register x4 for the add in the EX stage still depends on the result from or in EX/MEM, so the forwarding unit passes the result to the ALU. The bold lines show ALU input lines active in a clock cycle, and the italicized register numbers indicate a hazard. The instructions after add are shown as inactive for pedagogical reasons.

Chapter 4  The Processor to describe a pipeline like that in the Intel Core i7 will be hundreds of thousands of lines is an indication of the complexity. Beware! Fallacy:  Pipelining ideas can be implemented independent of technology. When the number of transistors on-chip and the speed of transistors made a five-stage pipeline the best solution, then the delayed branch (see the Elaboration on page 274) was a simple solution to control hazards. With longer pipelines, superscalar execution, and dynamic branch prediction, it is now redundant. In the early 1990s, dynamic pipeline scheduling took too many resources and was not required for high performance, but as transistor budgets continued to double due to Moore’s Law and logic became much faster than memory, then multiple functional units and dynamic pipelining made more sense. Today, concerns about power are leading to less aggressive and more efficient designs. Pitfall:  Failure to consider instruction set design can adversely impact pipelining. Many of the difficulties of pipelining arise because of instruction set complications. Here are some examples: ■ Widely variable instruction lengths and running times can lead to imbalance among pipeline stages and severely complicate hazard detection in a design pipelined at the instruction set level. This problem was overcome, initially in the DEC VAX 8500 in the late 1980s, using the micro-operations and micropipelined scheme that the Intel Core i7 employs today. Of course, the overhead of translation and maintaining correspondence between the micro- operations and the actual instructions remains. ■ Sophisticated-addressing modes can lead to different sorts of problems. Addressing modes that update registers complicate hazard detection. Other addressing modes that require multiple memory accesses substantially complicate pipeline control and make it difficult to keep the pipeline flowing smoothly. ■ Perhaps the best example is the DEC Alpha and the DEC NVAX. In comparable technology, the newer instruction set architecture of the Alpha allowed an implementation whose performance is more than twice as fast as NVAX. In another example, Bhandarkar and Clark [1991] compared the MIPS M/2000 and the DEC VAX 8700 by counting clock cycles of the SPEC benchmarks; they concluded that although the MIPS M/2000 executes more instructions, the VAX on average executes 2.7 times as many clock cycles, so the MIPS is faster.

 4.16  Concluding Remarks 4.16 Concluding Remarks As we have seen in this chapter, both the datapath and control for a processor can be designed starting with the instruction set architecture and an understanding of the basic characteristics of the technology. In Section 4.3, we saw how the datapath for an RISC-V processor could be constructed based on the architecture and the decision to build a single-cycle implementation. Of course, the underlying technology also affects many design decisions by dictating what components can be used in the datapath, as well as whether a single-cycle implementation even makes sense. Pipelining improves throughput but not the inherent execution time, or instruction latency, of instructions; for some instructions, the latency is similar in length to the single-cycle approach. Multiple instruction issue adds additional datapath hardware to allow multiple instructions to begin every clock cycle, but at an increase in effective latency. Pipelining was presented as reducing the clock cycle time of the simple single-cycle datapath. Multiple instruction issue, in comparison, clearly focuses on reducing clock cycles per instruction (CPI). Pipelining and multiple issue both attempt to exploit instruction-level parallelism. The presence of data and control dependences, which can become hazards, are the primary limitations on how much parallelism can be exploited. Scheduling and speculation via prediction, both in hardware and in software, are the primary techniques used to reduce the performance impact of dependences. We showed that unrolling the DGEMM loop four times exposed more instructions that could take advantage of the out-of-order execution engine of the Core i7 to more than double performance. The switch to longer pipelines, multiple instruction issue, and dynamic scheduling in the mid-1990s helped sustain the 60% per year processor performance increase that started in the early 1980s. As mentioned in Chapter  1, these microprocessors preserved the sequential programming model, but they eventually ran into the power wall. Thus, the industry was forced to switch to multiprocessors, which exploit parallelism at much coarser levels (the subject of Chapter 6). This trend has also caused designers to reassess the energy-performance implications of some of the inventions since the mid-1990s, resulting in a simplification of pipelines in the more recent versions of microarchitectures. To sustain the advances in processing performance via parallel processors, Amdahl’s law suggests that another part of the system will become the bottleneck. That bottleneck is the topic of the next chapter: the memory hierarchy. instruction latency  The inherent execution time for an instruction. Nine-tenths of wisdom consists of being wise in time. American proverb

Chapter 4  The Processor 4.17 Historical Perspective and Further Reading This section, which appears online, discusses the history of the first pipelined processors, the earliest superscalars, and the development of out-of-order and speculative techniques, as well as important developments in the accompanying compiler technology. 4.18 Self-Study While higher-performance processors have much longer pipelines than five stages, some very low-cost or low-energy processors have shorter pipelines. Assume the same timing of the datapath components as in Figures 4.43 and 4.44. Three-Stage Pipe. How would you split the datapath into stages if its pipeline had three stages rather than five? Clock Rate. Ignoring the impact of pipeline registers or forwarding logic on clock cycle time, what are the clock rates for the five-stage versus three-stage pipelines? Assume the same timing of the datapath components as in Figures 4.43 and 4.44. Register Write/Read Data Hazards? Do you still have them with three stages? If so, will forwarding fix them? Load-Use Data Hazards? Do you still have them with three stages? Do you need to stall the pipeline, or can forwarding fix them? Control Hazards? Do you still have them with three stages? If so, how can you reduce their impact? CPI. Will the clocks per instruction of the three-stage pipeline be higher or lower than that of the five-stage pipeline? Answers Three-Stage Pipe. While there are multiple possible solutions, this one is a sensible split: 1. Instruction fetch, register read (300 ps) 2. ALU (200 ps) 3. Data access, register write (300 ps) Instruction fetch Register read Instruction fetch ALU ALU ALU Register read Register read Register write Register write Register write Date access Date access Date access Instruction fetch

 4.16  Historical Perspective and Further Reading 368.e1 Historical Perspective and Further Reading This section discusses the history of the original pipelined processors, the earliest superscalars, and the development of out-of-order and speculative techniques, as well as important developments in the accompanying compiler technology. It is generally agreed that one of the first general-purpose pipelined computers was Stretch, the IBM 7030 (Figure e4.17.1). Stretch followed the IBM 704 and had a goal of being 100 times faster than the 704. The goals were a “stretch” of the state of the art at that time—hence the nickname. The plan was to obtain a factor of 1.6 from overlapping fetch, decode, and execute by using a four-stage pipeline. Apparently, the rest was to come from much more hardware and faster logic. Stretch was also a training ground for both the architects of the IBM 360, Gerrit Blaauw and Fred Brooks, Jr., and the architect of the IBM RS/6000, John Cocke. supercomputer: Any machine still on the drawing board. Stan Kelly-Bootle, The Devil’s DP Dictionary, FIGURE e4.17.1  The Stretch computer, one of the first pipelined computers. 4.17

368.e2 4.16  Historical Perspective and Further Reading Both Brooks and Cooke later won ACM A.M. Turing Awards, the highest honor in computer science. Control Data Corporation (CDC) delivered what is considered to be the first supercomputer, the CDC 6600, in 1964 (Figure e4.17.2). The core instructions of Cray’s subsequent computers have many similarities to those of the original CDC 6600. The CDC 6600 was unique in many ways. The interaction between pipelining and instruction set design was understood, and the instruction set was kept simple to promote pipelining. The CDC 6600 also used an advanced packaging technology. James Thornton’s book [1970] provides an excellent description of the entire computer, from technology to architecture, and includes a foreword by Seymour Cray. (Unfortunately, this book is currently out of print.) Jim Smith, then working at CDC, developed the original 2-bit branch prediction scheme and explored several techniques for enhancing instruction issue for the CDC Cyber 180/990. Cray, Thornton, and Smith have each won the ACM Eckert-Mauchly Award (in 1989, 1994, and 1999, respectively). The IBM 360/91 introduced many new concepts, including dynamic detection of memory hazards, generalized forwarding, and reservation stations (Figure e4.17.3). The approach is normally named Tomasulo’s algorithm, after an engineer who worked on the project. The team that created the 360/91 was led by Michael Flynn, who was given the 1992 ACM Eckert-Mauchly Award, in part for his contributions to the IBM 360/91; in 1997, the same award went to Robert Tomasulo for his pioneering work on out-of-order processing. FIGURE e4.17.2  The CDC 6600, the first supercomputer.

 4.16  Historical Perspective and Further Reading 368.e3 The internal organization of the 360/91 shares many features with the Pentium III and Pentium 4, as well as with several other microprocessors. One major difference was that there was no branch prediction in the 360/91 and hence no speculation. Another major difference was that there was no commit unit, so once the instructions finished execution, they updated the registers. Out-of-order instruction commit led to imprecise interrupts, which proved to be unpopular and led to the commit units in dynamically scheduled pipelined processors since that time. Although the 360/91 was not a success, its key ideas were resurrected later and exist in some form in the majority of desktop and server microprocessors since 2000. Improving Pipelining Effectiveness and Adding Multiple Issue The RISC processors refined the notion of compiler-scheduled pipelines in the early 1980s. The concepts of delayed branches and delayed loads—common in microprogramming—were extended into the high-level architecture. In fact, the Stanford processor that led to the commercial MIPS architecture was called “Microprocessor without Interlocked Pipelined Stages” because it was up to the assembler or compiler to avoid data hazards. In addition to its contribution to the development of the RISC concepts, IBM did pioneering work on multiple issue. In the 1960s, a project called ACS was under- way. It included multiple-instruction issue concepts and the notion of integrated FIGURE e4.17.3  The IBM 360/91 pushed the state of the art in pipelined execution when it was unveiled in 1966.

368.e4 4.16  Historical Perspective and Further Reading compiler and architecture design, but it never reached product stage. The earliest proposal for a superscalar processor that dynamically makes issue decisions was by John Cocke; he described the key ideas in several talks in the mid-1980s and, with Tilak Agarwala, coined the name superscalar. This original design was a two-issue machine named Cheetah, which was followed by a more widely discussed four-issue machine named America. The IBM Power-1 architecture, used in the RS/6000 line, is based on these ideas, and the PowerPC is a variation of the Power-1 architecture. Static multiple issue, as exemplified by the long instruction word (LIW) or sometimes very long instruction word (VLIW) approaches, appeared in real designs before the superscalar approach. In fact, the earliest multiple-issue machines were special-purpose attached processors designed for scientific applications. Culler Scientific and Floating Point Systems were two of the most prominent manufacturers of such computers. Another inspiration for the use of multiple operations per instruction came from those working on microcode compilers. Such inspiration led to a research project at Yale led by Josh Fisher, who coined the term VLIW. Cydrome and Multiflow were two early companies involved in building mini-supercomputers using processors with multiple-issue capability. These processors, built with bit-slice and multiple-chip gate array implementations, arrived on the market at the same time as the initial RISC microprocessors. Despite some promising performance on high-end scientific codes, the much better cost/ performance of the microprocessor-based computers doomed the first generation of VLIW computers. Bob Rau and Josh Fisher won the Eckert-Mauchly Award in 2002 and 2003, respectively, for their contributions to the development of multiple processors and software techniques to exploit ILP. The very beginning of the 1990s saw the first superscalar processors using static scheduling and no speculation, including versions of the MIPS and PowerPC architectures. The early 1990s also saw important research at a number of universities, including Wisconsin, Stanford, Illinois, and Michigan, focused on techniques for exploiting additional ILP through multiple issue with and without speculation. These research insights were used to build dynamically scheduled, speculative processors, including the Motorola 88110, MIPS R10000, DEC Alpha 21264, PowerPC 603, and the Intel Pentium Pro, Pentium III, and Pentium 4. In 2001, Intel introduced the IA-64 architecture and its first implementation, Itanium. Itanium represented a return to a more compiler-intensive approach that they called EPIC. EPIC represented a considerable enhancement over the early VLIW architectures, removing many of their drawbacks. It has had modest sales. In 2019, Intel announced that it would be discontinuing its Itanium 9700-series processors, the last EPIC chips on the market. Compiler Technology for Exploiting ILP Successful development of processors to exploit ILP has depended on progress in compiler technology. The concept of loop unrolling was understood early, and a number of companies and researchers—including Floating Point Systems, Cray, and the Stanford MIPS project—developed compilers that made use of loop 

 4.16  Historical Perspective and Further Reading 368.e5 unrolling and pipeline scheduling to improve instruction throughput. A special- purpose processor called WARP, designed at Carnegie Mellon University, inspired the development of software pipelining, an approach that symbolically unrolls loops. To exploit higher levels of ILP, more aggressive compiler technology was needed. The VLIW project at Yale developed the concept of trace scheduling that Multi- flow implemented in their compilers. Trace scheduling relies on aggressive loop unrolling and path prediction to compile favored execution traces efficiently. The Cydrome designers created early versions of predication and support for software pipelining. Hwu at Illinois worked on extended versions of loop unrolling, called superblocks, and techniques for compiling with predication. The concepts from Multiflow, Cydrome, and the research group at Illinois served as the architectural and compiler basis for the IA-64 architecture. Further Reading Bhandarkar, D. and D.W. Clark [1991]. “Performance from architecture: Comparing a RISC and a CISC with similar hardware organizations,” Proc. Fourth Conf. on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, IEEE/ACM (April), Palo Alto, CA, 310–19. A quantitative comparison of RISC and CISC written by scholars who argued for CISCs as well as built them; they conclude that MIPS is between 2 and 4 times faster than a VAX built with similar technology, with a mean of 2.7. Fisher, J.A. and B.R. Rau [1993]. Journal of Supercomputing (January), Kluwer. This entire issue is devoted to the topic of exploiting ILP. It contains papers on both the architecture and software and is a wonderful source for further references. Hennessy, J. L. and D. A. Patterson [2001]. Computer Architecture: A Quantitative Approach, fourth edition, Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco. Chapter 2 and Appendix A go into considerably more detail about pipelined processors (almost 200 pages), including superscalar processors and VLIW processors. Appendix G describes Itanium. Jouppi, N.P. and D.W. Wall [1989]. “Available instruction-level parallelism for superscalar and superpipelined processors,” Proc. Third Conf. on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, IEEE/ACM (April), Boston, 272–82. A comparison of deeply pipelined (also called superpipelined) and superscalar systems. Kogge, P. M. [1981]. The Architecture of Pipelined Computers, McGraw-Hill, New York. A formal text on pipelined control, with emphasis on underlying principles. Russell, R. M. [1978]. “The CRAY-1 computer system”, Comm. of the ACM 21:1 (January), 63–72. A short summary of a classic computer that uses vectors of operations to remove pipeline stalls. Smith, A. and J. Lee [1984]. “Branch prediction strategies and branch target buffer design”, Computer 17:1 (January), 6–22. An early survey on branch prediction.

368.e6 4.16  Historical Perspective and Further Reading Smith, J. E. and A. R. Plezkun [1988]. “Implementing precise interrupts in pipelined processors”, IEEE Trans. on Computers 37:5 (May), 562–73. Covers the difficulties in interrupting pipelined computers. Thornton, J. E. [1970]. Design of a Computer. The Control Data 6600, Glenview, IL: Scott, Foresman. A classic book describing a classic computer, considered the first supercomputer.

 4.19  Exercises Clock Rate. Figure 4.44 shows that the clock cycle time of the five-stage pipeline is 200 ps, so the clock rate is 1/200 ps or 5 GHz. The worst-case stage for the three- stage pipeline is 300 ps, so the clock rate is 1/300 ps or 3.33 GHz. Register Write/Read Data Hazards. As the pipeline drawing above shows, there is still a write/read hazard. The first instruction doesn’t write the data to registers in the third stage, but the next instruction needs the new value at the beginning of its second stage. The forwarding solution in in Section 4.8 works fine for the three-stage pipeline, as the ALU result of the prior instruction is ready before the beginning of its second stage. Load-Use Data Hazards. Even with three stages, we have to stall one clock cycle for a load-use hazard as in Section 4.8. The data are not available until the third stage of the load instruction, but the following instruction needs the new data at the beginning of its second stage. Control Hazards. This hazard is where the three-stage pipeline shines. We can use the same optimization as in Section 4.9 to calculate the branch address and compare registers for equality before the ALU stage, as we did in Figure 4.79. That calculation is performed before the instruction fetch of the following instruction, so early branch logic resolves the control hazard with no pipeline penalty. CPI. The average clocks per instruction will shrink (get better) with a three- stage pipeline for a couple of reasons: ■ Given that the clock cycle is longer, it will take fewer clock cycles to access DRAM memory, which will affect the CPI when we have a miss in the cache (see Chapter 5). ■ Branches will always execute in one clock cycle, whereas any software and hardware scheme to accelerate branches with five stages will fail some of the time, increasing the effective CPI. ■ Our clock cycle time is longer for the ALU, which may allow for some complex operations that might take more than one clock cycle in the five- stage pipeline. For example, integer multiply or divide might need fewer of these longer clock cycles than in the five-stage pipeline. 4.19 Exercises 4.1  Consider the following instruction: Instruction: and rd, rs1, rs2 Interpretation: Reg[rd] = Reg[rs1] AND Reg[rs2] 4.1.1  [5] <§4.3> What are the values of control signals generated by the control in Figure 4.10 for this instruction? 4.1.2  [5] <§4.3> Which resources (blocks) perform a useful function for this instruction?

Chapter 4  The Processor 4.1.3  [10] <§4.3> Which resources (blocks) produce no output for this instruction? Which resources produce output that is not used? 4.2  [10] <§4.4> Explain each of the “don’t cares” in Figure 4.22. 4.3  Consider the following instruction mix: R-type I-type (non-lw) Load Store Branch Jump 24% 28% 25% 10% 11% 2% 4.3.1  [5] <§4.4> What fraction of all instructions use data memory? 4.3.2  [5] <§4.4> What fraction of all instructions use instruction memory? 4.3.3  [5] <§4.4> What fraction of all instructions use the sign extend? 4.3.4  [5] <§4.4> What is the sign extend doing during cycles in which its output is not needed? 4.4  When silicon chips are fabricated, defects in materials (e.g., silicon) and manufacturing errors can result in defective circuits. A very common defect is for one signal wire to get “broken” and always register a logical 0. This is often called a “stuck-at-0” fault. 4.4.1  [5] <§4.4> Which instructions fail to operate correctly if the MemToReg wire is stuck at 0? 4.4.2  [5] <§4.4> Which instructions fail to operate correctly if the ALUSrc wire is stuck at 0? 4.5  In this exercise, we examine in detail how an instruction is executed in a single-cycle datapath. Problems in this exercise refer to a clock cycle in which the processor fetches the following instruction word: 0x00c6ba23. 4.5.1  [10] <§4.4> What are the values of the ALU control unit’s inputs for this instruction? 4.5.2  [5] <§4.4> What is the new PC address after this instruction is executed? Highlight the path through which this value is determined. 4.5.3  [10] <§4.4> For each mux, show the values of its inputs and outputs during the execution of this instruction. List values that are register outputs at Reg [xn]. 4.5.4  [10] <§4.4> What are the input values for the ALU and the two add units? 4.5.5  [10] <§4.4> What are the values of all inputs for the registers unit?

 4.19  Exercises 4.6  Section 4.4 does not discuss I-type instructions like addi or andi. 4.6.1  [5] <§4.4> What additional logic blocks, if any, are needed to add I-type instructions to the CPU shown in Figure 4.21? Add any necessary logic blocks to Figure 4.21 and explain their purpose. 4.6.2  [10] <§4.4> List the values of the signals generated by the control unit for addi. Explain the reasoning for any “don’t care” control signals. 4.7  Problems in this exercise assume that the logic blocks used to implement a processor’s datapath have the following latencies: I-Mem / D-Mem Register File Mux ALU Adder Single gate Register Read Register Setup Sign extend Control 250 ps 150 ps 25 ps 200 ps 150 ps 5 ps 30 ps 20 ps 50 ps 50 ps “Register read” is the time needed after the rising clock edge for the new register value to appear on the output. This value applies to the PC only. “Register setup” is the amount of time a register’s data input must be stable before the rising edge of the clock. This value applies to both the PC and Register File. 4.7.1  [5] <§4.4> What is the latency of an R-type instruction (i.e., how long must the clock period be to ensure that this instruction works correctly)? 4.7.2  [10] <§4.4> What is the latency of lw? (Check your answer carefully. Many students place extra muxes on the critical path.) 4.7.3  [10] <§4.4> What is the latency of sw? (Check your answer carefully. Many students place extra muxes on the critical path.) 4.7.4  [5] <§4.4> What is the latency of beq? 4.7.5  [5] <§4.4> What is the latency of an arithmetic, logical, or shift I-type (non-load) instruction? 4.7.6  [5] <§4.4> What is the minimum clock period for this CPU? 4.8  [10] <§4.4> Suppose you could build a CPU where the clock cycle time was different for each instruction. What would the speedup of this new CPU be over the CPU presented in Figure 4.25 given the instruction mix below? R-type/I-type (non-ld) lw sw beq 52% 25% 11% 12% 4.9  Consider the addition of a multiplier to the CPU shown in Figure 4.25. This addition will add 300 ps to the latency of the ALU, but will reduce the number of instructions by 5% (because there will no longer be a need to emulate the multiply instruction).

Chapter 4  The Processor 4.9.1  [5] <§4.4> What is the clock cycle time with and without this improvement? 4.9.2  [10] <§4.4> What is the speedup achieved by adding this improvement? 4.9.3  [10] <§4.4> What is the slowest the new ALU can be and still result in improved performance? 4.10  When processor designers consider a possible improvement to the processor datapath, the decision usually depends on the cost/performance trade-off. In the following three problems, assume that we are beginning with the datapath from Figure 4.25, the latencies from Exercise 4.7, and the following costs: I-Mem Register File Mux ALU Adder D-Mem Single Register Sign extend Single gate Control Suppose doubling the number of general purpose registers from 32 to 64 would reduce the number of lw and sw instructions executed by 12%, but increase the latency of the register file from 150 ps to 160 ps and double the cost from 200 to 400. (Use the instruction mix from Exercise 4.8.) 4.10.1  [5] <§4.4> What is the speedup achieved by adding this improvement? 4.10.2  [10] <§4.4> Compare the change in performance to the change in cost. 4.10.3  [10] <§4.4> Given the cost/performance ratios you just calculated, describe a situation where it makes sense to add more registers and describe a situation where it doesn’t make sense to add more registers. 4.11  Examine the difficulty of adding a proposed lwi.d rd, rs1, rs2 (“Load With Increment”) instruction to RISC-V. Interpretation: Reg[rd]=Mem[Reg[rs1]+Reg[rs2]] 4.11.1  [5] <§4.4> Which new functional blocks (if any) do we need for this instruction? 4.11.2  [5] <§4.4> Which existing functional blocks (if any) require modification? 4.11.3  [5] <§4.4> Which new data paths (if any) do we need for this instruction? 4.11.4  [5] <§4.4> What new signals do we need (if any) from the control unit to support this instruction? 4.12  Examine the difficulty of adding a proposed swap rs1, rs2 instruction to RISC-V. Interpretation: Reg[rs2]=Reg[rs1]; Reg[rs1]=Reg[rs2]

 4.19  Exercises 4.12.1  [5] <§4.4> Which new functional blocks (if any) do we need for this instruction? 4.12.2  [10] <§4.4> Which existing functional blocks (if any) require modification? 4.12.3  [5] <§4.4> What new data paths do we need (if any) to support this instruction? 4.12.4  [5] <§4.4> What new signals do we need (if any) from the control unit to support this instruction? 4.12.5  [5] <§4.4> Modify Figure 4.25 to demonstrate an implementation of this new instruction. 4.13  Examine the difficulty of adding a proposed ss rs1, rs2, imm (Store Sum) instruction to RISC-V. Interpretation: Mem[Reg[rs1]]=Reg[rs2]+immediate 4.13.1  [10] <§4.4> Which new functional blocks (if any) do we need for this instruction? 4.13.2  [10] <§4.4> Which existing functional blocks (if any) require modification? 4.13.3  [5] <§4.4> What new data paths do we need (if any) to support this instruction? 4.13.4  [5] <§4.4> What new signals do we need (if any) from the control unit to support this instruction? 4.13.5  [5] <§4.4> Modify Figure 4.25 to demonstrate an implementation of this new instruction. 4.14  [5] <§4.4> For which instructions (if any) is the Imm Gen block on the critical path? 4.15  lw is the instruction with the longest latency on the CPU from Section 4.4. If we modified lw and sw so that there was no offset (i.e., the address to be loaded from/stored to must be calculated and placed in rs1 before calling lw/sw), then no instruction would use both the ALU and Data memory. This would allow us to reduce the clock cycle time. However, it would also increase the number of instructions, because many lw and sw instructions would need to be replaced with lw/add or sw/add combinations. 4.15.1  [5] <§4.4> What would the new clock cycle time be?

Chapter 4  The Processor 4.15.2  [10] <§4.4> Would a program with the instruction mix presented in Exercise 4.7 run faster or slower on this new CPU? By how much? (For simplicity, assume every lw and sw instruction is replaced with a sequence of two instructions.) 4.15.3  [5] <§4.4> What is the primary factor that influences whether a program will run faster or slower on the new CPU? 4.15.4  [5] <§4.4> Do you consider the original CPU (as shown in Figure 4.25) a better overall design; or do you consider the new CPU a better overall design? Why? 4.16  In this exercise, we examine how pipelining affects the clock cycle time of the processor. Problems in this exercise assume that individual stages of the datapath have the following latencies: IF ID EX MEM WB 250 ps 350 ps 150 ps 300 ps 200 ps Also, assume that instructions executed by the processor are broken down as follows: ALU/Logic Jump/Branch Load Store 45% 20% 20% 15% 4.16.1  [5] <§4.6> What is the clock cycle time in a pipelined and non-pipelined processor? 4.16.2  [10] <§4.6> What is the total latency of an lw instruction in a pipelined and non-pipelined processor? 4.16.3  [10] <§4.6> If we can split one stage of the pipelined datapath into two new stages, each with half the latency of the original stage, which stage would you split and what is the new clock cycle time of the processor? 4.16.4  [10] <§4.6> Assuming there are no stalls or hazards, what is the utilization of the data memory? 4.16.5  [10] <§4.6> Assuming there are no stalls or hazards, what is the utilization of the write-register port of the “Registers” unit? 4.17  [10] <§4.6> What is the minimum number of cycles needed to completely execute n instructions on a CPU with a k stage pipeline? Justify your formula. 4.18  [5] <§4.6> Assume that x11 is initialized to 11 and x12 is initialized to 22. Suppose you executed the code below on a version of the pipeline from Section 

 4.19  Exercises 4.6 that does not handle data hazards (i.e., the programmer is responsible for addressing data hazards by inserting NOP instructions where necessary). What would the final values of registers x13 and x14 be? addi x11, x12, 5 add x13, x11, x12 addi x14, x11, 15 4.19  [10] <§4.6> Assume that x11 is initialized to 11 and x12 is initialized to 22. Suppose you executed the code below on a version of the pipeline from Section 4.6 that does not handle data hazards (i.e., the programmer is responsible for addressing data hazards by inserting NOP instructions where necessary). What would the final values of register x15 be? Assume the register file is written at the beginning of the cycle and read at the end of a cycle. Therefore, an ID stage will return the results of a WB state occurring during the same cycle. See Section 4.8 and Figure 4.68 for details. addi x11, x12, 5 add x13, x11, x12 addi x14, x11, 15 add x15, x11, x11 4.20  [5] <§4.5> Add NOP instructions to the code below so that it will run correctly on a pipeline that does not handle data hazards. addi x11, x12, 5 add x13, x11, x12 addi x14, x11, 15 add x15, x13, x12 4.21  Consider a version of the pipeline from Section 4.6 that does not handle data hazards (i.e., the programmer is responsible for addressing data hazards by inserting NOP instructions where necessary). Suppose that (after optimization) a typical n-instruction program requires an additional 4*n NOP instructions to correctly handle data hazards. 4.21.1  [5] <§4.6> Suppose that the cycle time of this pipeline without forwarding is 250 ps. Suppose also that adding forwarding hardware will reduce the number of NOPs from .4*n to .05*n, but increase the cycle time to 300 ps. What is the speedup of this new pipeline compared to the one without forwarding?

Chapter 4  The Processor 4.21.2  [10] <§4.6> Different programs will require different amounts of NOPs. How many NOPs (as a percentage of code instructions) can remain in the typical program before that program runs slower on the pipeline with forwarding? 4.21.3  [10] <§4.6> Repeat 4.21.2; however, this time let x represent the number of NOP instructions relative to n. (In 4.21.2, x was equal to .4.) Your answer will be with respect to x. 4.21.4  [10] <§4.6> Can a program with only .075*n NOPs possibly run faster on the pipeline with forwarding? Explain why or why not. 4.21.5  [10] <§4.6> At minimum, how many NOPs (as a percentage of code instructions) must a program have before it can possibly run faster on the pipeline with forwarding? 4.22  [5] <§4.6> Consider the fragment of RISC-V assembly below: sw x29, 12(x16) lw x29, 8(x16) sub x17, x15, x14 beqz x17, label add x15, x11, x14 sub x15, x30, x14 Suppose we modify the pipeline so that it has only one memory (that handles both instructions and data). In this case, there will be a structural hazard every time a program needs to fetch an instruction during the same cycle in which another instruction accesses data. 4.22.1  [5] <§4.6> Draw a pipeline diagram to show were the code above will stall. 4.22.2  [5] <§4.6> In general, is it possible to reduce the number of stalls/NOPs resulting from this structural hazard by reordering code? 4.22.3  [5] <§4.6> Must this structural hazard be handled in hardware? We have seen that data hazards can be eliminated by adding NOPs to the code. Can you do the same with this structural hazard? If so, explain how. If not, explain why not. 4.22.4  [5] <§4.6> Approximately how many stalls would you expect this structural hazard to generate in a typical program? (Use the instruction mix from Exercise 4.8.) 4.23  If we change load/store instructions to use a register (without an offset) as the address, these instructions no longer need to use the ALU. (See Exercise 4.15.) 

 4.19  Exercises As a result, the MEM and EX stages can be overlapped and the pipeline has only four stages. 4.23.1  [10] <§4.6> How will the reduction in pipeline depth affect the cycle time? 4.23.2  [5] <§4.6> How might this change improve the performance of the pipeline? 4.23.3  [5] <§4.6> How might this change degrade the performance of the pipeline? 4.24 [10] <§4.8> Which of the two pipeline diagrams below better describes the operation of the pipeline’s hazard detection unit? Why? Choice 1: lw x11, 0(x12): IF ID EX ME WB add x13, x11, x14: IF ID EX..ME WB or x15, x16, x17:      IF ID..EX ME WB Choice 2: lw x11, 0(x12):    IF ID EX ME WB add x13, x11, x14:  IF ID..EX ME WB or x15, x16, x17:    IF..ID EX ME WB 4.25  Consider the following loop. LOOP: lw x10, 0(x13)   lw x11, 8(x13)     add x12, x10, x11     addi x13, x13, 16       bnez x12, LOOP Assume that perfect branch prediction is used (no stalls due to control hazards), that there are no delay slots, that the pipeline has full forwarding support, and that branches are resolved in the EX (as opposed to the ID) stage. 4.25.1  [10] <§4.8> Show a pipeline execution diagram for the first two iterations of this loop. 4.25.2  [10] <§4.8> Mark pipeline stages that do not perform useful work. How often while the pipeline is full do we have a cycle in which all five pipeline stages are doing useful work? (Begin with the cycle during which the addi is in the IF stage. End with the cycle during which the bnez is in the IF stage.)

Chapter 4  The Processor 4.26  This exercise is intended to help you understand the cost/complexity/ performance trade-offs of forwarding in a pipelined processor. Problems in this exercise refer to pipelined datapaths from Figure 4.70. These problems assume that, of all the instructions executed in a processor, the following fraction of these instructions has a particular type of RAW data dependence. The type of RAW data dependence is identified by the stage that produces the result (EX or MEM) and the next instruction that consumes the result (1st instruction that follows the one that produces the result, 2nd instruction that follows, or both). We assume that the register write is done in the first half of the clock cycle and that register reads are done in the second half of the cycle, so “EX to 3rd” and “MEM to 3rd” dependences are not counted because they cannot result in data hazards. We also assume that branches are resolved in the EX stage (as opposed to the ID stage), and that the CPI of the processor is 1 if there are no data hazards. EX to 1st Only MEM to 1st Only EX to 2nd Only MEM to 2nd Only EX to 1st and EX to 2nd 5% 20% 5% 10% 10% Assume the following latencies for individual pipeline stages. For the EX stage, latencies are given separately for a processor without forwarding and for a processor with different kinds of forwarding. IF ID EX (no FW) EX (full FW) EX (FW from EX/ MEM only) EX (FW from MEM/ WB only) MEM WB 120 ps 100 ps 110 ps 130 ps 120 ps 120 ps 120 ps 100 ps 4.26.1  [5] <§4.8> For each RAW dependency listed above, give a sequence of at least three assembly statements that exhibits that dependency. 4.26.2  [5] <§4.8> For each RAW dependency above, how many NOPs would need to be inserted to allow your code from 4.26.1 to run correctly on a pipeline with no forwarding or hazard detection? Show where the NOPs could be inserted. 4.26.3  [10] <§4.8> Analyzing each instruction independently will over-count the number of NOPs needed to run a program on a pipeline with no forwarding or hazard detection. Write a sequence of three assembly instructions so that, when you consider each instruction in the sequence independently, the sum of the stalls is larger than the number of stalls the sequence actually needs to avoid data hazards. 4.26.4  [5] <§4.8> Assuming no other hazards, what is the CPI for the program described by the table above when run on a pipeline with no forwarding? What percent of cycles are stalls? (For simplicity, assume that all necessary cases are listed above and can be treated independently.) 4.26.5  [5] <§4.8> What is the CPI if we use full forwarding (forward all results that can be forwarded)? What percent of cycles are stalls?

 4.19  Exercises 4.26.6  [10] <§4.8> Let us assume that we cannot afford to have three-input multiplexors that are needed for full forwarding. We have to decide if it is better to forward only from the EX/MEM pipeline register (next-cycle forwarding) or only from the MEM/WB pipeline register (two-cycle forwarding). What is the CPI for each option? 4.26.7  [5] <§4.8> For the given hazard probabilities and pipeline stage latencies, what is the speedup achieved by each type of forwarding (EX/MEM, MEM/WB, for full) as compared to a pipeline that has no forwarding? 4.26.8  [5] <§4.8> What would be the additional speedup (relative to the fastest processor from 4.26.7) be if we added “time-travel” forwarding that eliminates all data hazards? Assume that the yet-to-be-invented time-travel circuitry adds 100 ps to the latency of the full-forwarding EX stage. 4.26.9  [5] <§4.8> The table of hazard types has separate entries for “EX to 1st” and “EX to 1st and EX to 2nd”. Why is there no entry for “MEM to 1st and MEM to 2nd”? 4.27  Problems in this exercise refer to the following sequence of instructions, and assume that it is executed on a five-stage pipelined datapath: add x15, x12, x11 lw x13, 8(x15) lw x12, 0(x2) or x13, x15, x13 sw x13, 0(x15) 4.27.1  [5] <§4.8> If there is no forwarding or hazard detection, insert NOPs to ensure correct execution. 4.27.2  [10] <§4.8> Now, change and/or rearrange the code to minimize the number of NOPs needed. You can assume register x17 can be used to hold temporary values in your modified code. 4.27.3  [10] <§4.8> If the processor has forwarding, but we forgot to implement the hazard detection unit, what happens when the original code executes? 4.27.4  [20] <§4.8> If there is forwarding, for the first seven cycles during the execution of this code, specify which signals are asserted in each cycle by hazard detection and forwarding units in Figure 4.76. 4.27.5  [10] <§4.8> If there is no forwarding, what new input and output signals do we need for the hazard detection unit in Figure 4.76? Using this instruction sequence as an example, explain why each signal is needed.

Chapter 4  The Processor 4.27.6  [20] <§4.8> For the new hazard detection unit from 4.26.5, specify which output signals it asserts in each of the first five cycles during the execution of this code. 4.28  The importance of having a good branch predictor depends on how often conditional branches are executed. Together with branch predictor accuracy, this will determine how much time is spent stalling due to mispredicted branches. In this exercise, assume that the breakdown of dynamic instructions into various instruction categories is as follows: R-type beqz/bnez jal lw sw 40% 25% 5% 25% 5% Also, assume the following branch predictor accuracies: Always-Taken Always-Not-Taken 2-Bit 45% 55% 85% 4.28.1  [10] <§4.9> Stall cycles due to mispredicted branches increase the CPI. What is the extra CPI due to mispredicted branches with the always-taken predictor? Assume that branch outcomes are determined in the ID stage and applied in the EX stage that there are no data hazards, and that no delay slots are used. 4.28.2  [10] <§4.9> Repeat 4.28.1 for the “always-not-taken” predictor. 4.28.3  [10] <§4.9> Repeat 4.28.1 for the 2-bit predictor. 4.28.4  [10] <§4.9> With the 2-bit predictor, what speedup would be achieved if we could convert half of the branch instructions to some ALU instruction? Assume that correctly and incorrectly predicted instructions have the same chance of being replaced. 4.28.5  [10] <§4.9> With the 2-bit predictor, what speedup would be achieved if we could convert half of the branch instructions in a way that replaced each branch instruction with two ALU instructions? Assume that correctly and incorrectly predicted instructions have the same chance of being replaced. 4.28.6  [10] <§4.9> Some branch instructions are much more predictable than others. If we know that 80% of all executed branch instructions are easy-to-predict loop-back branches that are always predicted correctly, what is the accuracy of the 2-bit predictor on the remaining 20% of the branch instructions? 4.29  This exercise examines the accuracy of various branch predictors for the following repeating pattern (e.g., in a loop) of branch outcomes: T, NT, T, T, NT.

 4.19  Exercises 4.29.1  [5] <§4.9> What is the accuracy of always-taken and always-not-taken predictors for this sequence of branch outcomes? 4.29.2  [5] <§4.9> What is the accuracy of the 2-bit predictor for the first four branches in this pattern, assuming that the predictor starts off in the bottom left state from Figure 4.78 (predict not taken)? 4.29.3  [10] <§4.9> What is the accuracy of the 2-bit predictor if this pattern is repeated forever? 4.29.4  [30] <§4.9> Design a predictor that would achieve a perfect accuracy if this pattern is repeated forever. You predictor should be a sequential circuit with one output that provides a prediction (1 for taken, 0 for not taken) and no inputs other than the clock and the control signal that indicates that the instruction is a conditional branch. 4.29.5  [10] <§4.9> What is the accuracy of your predictor from 4.29.4 if it is given a repeating pattern that is the exact opposite of this one? 4.29.6  [20] <§4.9> Repeat 4.29.4, but now your predictor should be able to eventually (after a warm-up period during which it can make wrong predictions) start perfectly predicting both this pattern and its opposite. Your predictor should have an input that tells it what the real outcome was. Hint: this input lets your predictor determine which of the two repeating patterns it is given. 4.30  This exercise explores how exception handling affects pipeline design. The first three problems in this exercise refer to the following two instructions: Instruction 1 Instruction 2 beqz x11, LABEL lw x11, 0(x12) 4.30.1  [5] <§4.10> Which exceptions can each of these instructions trigger? For each of these exceptions, specify the pipeline stage in which it is detected. 4.30.2  [10] <§4.10> If there is a separate handler address for each exception, show how the pipeline organization must be changed to be able to handle this exception. You can assume that the addresses of these handlers are known when the processor is designed. 4.30.3  [10] <§4.10> If the second instruction is fetched immediately after the first instruction, describe what happens in the pipeline when the first instruction causes the first exception you listed in Exercise 4.30.1. Show the pipeline execution diagram from the time the first instruction is fetched until the time the first instruction of the exception handler is completed. 4.30.4  [20] <§4.10> In vectored exception handling, the table of exception handler addresses is in data memory at a known (fixed) address. Change the 

Chapter 4  The Processor pipeline to implement this exception handling mechanism. Repeat Exercise 4.30.3 using this modified pipeline and vectored exception handling. 4.30.5  [15] <§4.10> We want to emulate vectored exception handling (described in Exercise 4.30.4) on a machine that has only one fixed handler address. Write the code that should be at that fixed address. Hint: this code should identify the exception, get the right address from the exception vector table, and transfer execution to that handler. 4.31  In this exercise we compare the performance of 1-issue and 2-issue processors, taking into account program transformations that can be made to optimize for 2-issue execution. Problems in this exercise refer to the following loop (written in C): for(i=0;i!=j;i+=2)     b[i]=a[i]–a[i+1]; A compiler doing little or no optimization might produce the following RISC-V assembly code: addi x12, x0, 0 jal ENT TOP:  slli x5, x12, 3 add x6, x10, x5 lw x7, 0(x6) lw x29, 8(x6) sub x30, x7, x29 add x31, x11, x5 sw x30, 0(x31) addi x12, x12, 2 ENT:  bne x12, x13, TOP The code above uses the following registers: i j a b Temporary values x12 x13 x10 x11 x5–x7, x29–x31 Assume the two-issue, statically scheduled processor for this exercise has the following properties: 1.  One instruction must be a memory operation; the other must be an arithmetic/logic instruction or a branch. 2.  The processor has all possible forwarding paths between stages (including paths to the ID stage for branch resolution). 3.  The processor has perfect branch prediction. 4.  Two instruction may not issue together in a packet if one depends on the other. (See page 342.)

 4.19  Exercises 5.  If a stall is necessary, both instructions in the issue packet must stall. (See page 342.) As you complete these exercises, notice how much effort goes into generating code that will produce a near-optimal speedup. 4.31.1  [30] <§4.11> Draw a pipeline diagram showing how RISC-V code given above executes on the two-issue processor. Assume that the loop exits after two iterations. 4.31.2  [10] <§4.11> What is the speedup of going from a one-issue to a two- issue processor? (Assume the loop runs thousands of iterations.) 4.31.3  [10] <§4.11> Rearrange/rewrite the RISC-V code given above to achieve better performance on the one-issue processor. Hint: Use the instruction “beqz x13,DONE” to skip the loop entirely if j = 0. 4.31.4  [20] <§4.11> Rearrange/rewrite the RISC-V code given above to achieve better performance on the two-issue processor. (Do not unroll the loop, however.) 4.31.5  [30] <§4.11> Repeat Exercise 4.31.1, but this time use your optimized code from Exercise 4.31.4. 4.31.6  [10] <§4.11> What is the speedup of going from a one-issue processor to a two-issue processor when running the optimized code from Exercises 4.31.3 and 4.31.4. 4.31.7  [10] <§4.11> Unroll the RISC-V code from Exercise 4.31.3 so that each iteration of the unrolled loop handles two iterations of the original loop. Then, rearrange/rewrite your unrolled code to achieve better performance on the one- issue processor. You may assume that j is a multiple of 4. 4.31.8  [20] <§4.11> Unroll the RISC-V code from Exercise 4.31.4 so that each iteration of the unrolled loop handles two iterations of the original loop. Then, rearrange/rewrite your unrolled code to achieve better performance on the two- issue processor. You may assume that j is a multiple of 4. (Hint: Re-organize the loop so that some calculations appear both outside the loop and at the end of the loop. You may assume that the values in temporary registers are not needed after the loop.) 4.31.9  [10] <§4.11> What is the speedup of going from a one-issue processor to a two-issue processor when running the unrolled, optimized code from Exercises 4.31.7 and 4.31.8? 4.31.10  [30] <§4.11> Repeat Exercises 4.31.8 and 4.31.9, but this time assume the two-issue processor can run two arithmetic/logic instructions together. (In other words, the first instruction in a packet can be any type of instruction, but the second must be an arithmetic or logic instruction. Two memory operations cannot be scheduled at the same time.)

Chapter 4  The Processor 4.32  This exercise explores energy efficiency and its relationship with performance. Problems in this exercise assume the following energy consumption for activity in Instruction memory, Registers, and Data memory. You can assume that the other components of the datapath consume a negligible amount of energy. (“Register Read” and “Register Write” refer to the register file only.) I-Mem 1 Register Read Register Write D-Mem Read D-Mem Write 140pJ 70pJ 60pJ 140pJ 120pJ Assume that components in the datapath have the following latencies. You can assume that the other components of the datapath have negligible latencies. I-Mem Control Register Read or Write ALU D-Mem Read or Write 200 ps 150 ps 90 ps 90 ps 250 ps 4.32.1  [5] <§§4.3, 4.7, 4.15> How much energy is spent to execute an add instruction in a single-cycle design and in the five-stage pipelined design? 4.32.2  [10] <§§4.7, 4.15> What is the worst-case RISC-V instruction in terms of energy consumption? What is the energy spent to execute it? 4.32.3  [10] <§§4.7, 4.15> If energy reduction is paramount, how would you change the pipelined design? What is the percentage reduction in the energy spent by an lw instruction after this change? 4.32.4  [10] <§§4.7, 4.15> What other instructions can potentially benefit from the change discussed in Exercise 4.32.3? 4.32.5  [10] <§§4.7, 4.15> How do your changes from Exercise 4.32.3 affect the performance of a pipelined CPU? 4.32.6  [10] <§§4.7, 4.15> We can eliminate the MemRead control signal and have the data memory be read in every cycle, i.e., we can permanently have MemRead=1. Explain why the processor still functions correctly after this change. If 25% of instructions are loads, what is the effect of this change on clock frequency and energy consumption? 4.33  When silicon chips are fabricated, defects in materials (e.g., silicon) and manufacturing errors can result in defective circuits. A very common defect is for one wire to affect the signal in another. This is called a “cross-talk fault”. A special class of cross-talk faults is when a signal is connected to a wire that has a constant logical value (e.g., a power supply wire). These faults, where the affected signal always has a logical value of either 0 or 1 are called “stuck-at-0” or “stuck- at-1” faults. The following problems refer to bit 0 of the Write Register input on the register file in Figure 4.25. 4.33.1  [10] <§§4.3, 4.4> Let us assume that processor testing is done by (1) filling the PC, registers, and data and instruction memories with some values (you 

 4.19  Exercises can choose which values), (2) letting a single instruction execute, then (3) reading the PC, memories, and registers. These values are then examined to determine if a particular fault is present. Can you design a test (values for PC, memories, and registers) that would determine if there is a stuck-at-0 fault on this signal? 4.33.2  [10] <§§4.3, 4.4> Repeat Exercise 4.33.1 for a stuck-at-1 fault. Can you use a single test for both stuck-at-0 and stuck-at-1? If yes, explain how; if no, explain why not. 4.33.3  [10] <§§4.3, 4.4> If we know that the processor has a stuck-at-1 fault on this signal, is the processor still usable? To be usable, we must be able to convert any program that executes on a normal RISC-V processor into a program that works on this processor. You can assume that there is enough free instruction memory and data memory to let you make the program longer and store additional data. 4.33.4  [10] <§§4.3, 4.4> Repeat Exercise 4.33.1; but now the fault to test for is whether the MemRead control signal becomes 0 if the branch control signal is 0, no fault otherwise. 4.33.5  [10] <§§4.3, 4.4> Repeat Exercise 4.33.1; but now the fault to test for is whether the MemRead control signal becomes 1 if RegRd control signal is 1, no fault otherwise. Hint: This problem requires knowledge of operating systems. Consider what causes segmentation faults. §4.1, page 258: 3 of 5: Control, Datapath, Memory. Input and Output are missing. §4.2, page 261: false. Edge-triggered state elements make simultaneous reading and writing both possible and unambiguous. §4.3, page 268: I. a. II. c. §4.4, page 285: Yes, Branch and ALUOp0 are identical. In addition, you can use the flexibility of the don’t care bits to combine other signals together. ALUSrc and MemtoReg can be made the same by setting the two don’t care bits of MemtoReg to 1 and 0. ALUOp1 and MemtoReg can be made to be inverses of one another by setting the don’t care bit of MemtoReg to 1. You don’t need an inverter; simply use the other signal and flip the order of the inputs to the MemtoReg multiplexor! §4.5, Maybe: If the signal PCSource is always set to zero when it is a don’t care (which is most states), then it is identical to PCWriteCond. §4.6, page 295: 1. Stall due to a load-use data hazard of the lw result. 2. Avoid stalling in the third instruction for the read-after-write data hazard on x11 by forwarding the add result. 3. It need not stall, even without forwarding. §4.7, page 309: Statements 2 and 4 are correct; the rest are incorrect. §4.9, page 332: 1. Predict not taken. 2. Predict taken. 3. Dynamic prediction. §4.10, page 339: The first instruction, since it is logically executed before the others. §4.11, page 353: 1. Both. 2. Both. 3. Software. 4. Hardware. 5. Hardware. 6. Hardware. 7. Both. 8. Hardware. 9. Both. §4.13, page 365: First two are false and the last two are true. Answers to Check Yourself

Large and Fast: Exploiting Memory Hierarchy 5.1 Introduction  388 5.2 Memory Technologies  392 5.3 The Basics of Caches  398 5.4 Measuring and Improving Cache Performance  412 5.5 Dependable Memory Hierarchy  431 5.6 Virtual Machines  436 5.7 Virtual Memory  440 Ideally one would desire an indefinitely large memory capacity such that any particular … word would be immediately available. … We are … forced to recognize the possibility of constructing a hierarchy of memories, each of which has greater capacity than the preceding but which is less quickly accessible. A. W. Burks, H. H. Goldstine, and J. von Neumann, Preliminary Discussion of the Logical Design of an Electronic Computing Instrument, 1946 Computer Organization and Design RISC-V Edition. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-820331-6.00005-3 © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

 5.8 A Common Framework for Memory Hierarchy  464 5.9 Using a Finite-State Machine to Control a Simple Cache  470 5.10 Parallelism and Memory Hierarchy: Cache Coherence  475 5.11 Parallelism and Memory Hierarchy: Redundant Arrays of Inexpensive Disks  479 5.12 Advanced Material: Implementing Cache Controllers  480 5.13 Real Stuff: The ARM Cortex-A8 and Intel Core i7 Memory Hierarchies  480 5.14 Real Stuff: The Rest of the RISC-V System and Special Instructions  486 5.15 Going Faster: Cache Blocking and Matrix Multiply  488 5.16 Fallacies and Pitfalls  489 5.17 Concluding Remarks  494 5.18 Historical Perspective and Further Reading  495 5.19 Self-Study  495 5.20 Exercises  499 The Five Classic Components of a Computer

Chapter 5  Large and Fast: Exploiting Memory Hierarchy 5.1 Introduction From the earliest days of computing, programmers have wanted unlimited amounts of fast memory. The topics in this chapter aid programmers by creating that illusion. Before we look at creating the illusion, let’s consider a simple analogy that illustrates the key principles and mechanisms that we use. Suppose you were a student writing a term paper on important historical developments in computer hardware. You are sitting at a desk in a library with a collection of books that you have pulled from the shelves and are examining. You find that several of the important computers that you need to write about are described in the books you have, but there is nothing about the EDSAC. Therefore, you go back to the shelves and look for an additional book. You find a book on early British computers that covers the EDSAC. Once you have a good selection of books on the desk in front of you, there is a high probability that many of the topics you need can be found in them, and you may spend most of your time just using the books on the desk without returning to the shelves. Having several books on the desk in front of you saves time compared to having only one book there and constantly having to go back to the shelves to return it and take out another. The same principle allows us to create the illusion of a large memory that we can access as fast as a very small memory. Just as you did not need to access all the books in the library at once with equal probability, a program does not access all of its code or data at once with equal probability. Otherwise, it would be impossible to make most memory accesses fast and still have large memory in computers, just as it would be impossible for you to fit all the library books on your desk and still find what you wanted quickly. This principle of locality underlies both the way in which you did your work in the library and the way that programs operate. The principle of locality states that programs access a relatively small portion of their address space at any instant of time, just as you accessed a very small portion of the library’s collection. There are two different types of locality: ■ Temporal locality (locality in time): if an item is referenced, it will tend to be referenced again soon. If you recently brought a book to your desk to look at, you will probably need to look at it again soon. ■ Spatial locality (locality in space): if an item is referenced, items whose addresses are close by will tend to be referenced soon. For example, when you brought out the book on early English computers to learn about the EDSAC, you also noticed that there was another book shelved next to it about early mechanical computers, so you likewise brought back that book and, later on, found something useful in that book. Libraries put books on the same topic together on the same shelves to increase spatial locality. We’ll see how memory hierarchies use spatial locality a little later in this chapter. temporal locality  The locality principle stating that if a data location is referenced then it will tend to be referenced again soon. spatial locality  The locality principle stating that if a data location is referenced, data locations with nearby addresses will tend to be referenced soon.

 5.1  Introduction Just as accesses to books on the desk naturally exhibit locality, locality in programs arises from simple and natural program structures. For example, most programs contain loops, so instructions and data are likely to be access repeatedly, showing large temporal locality. Since instructions are normally accessed sequentially, programs also show high spatial locality. Access to data also exhibits a natural spatial locality. For example, sequential access to elements of an array or a record will naturally have high degrees of spatial locality. We take advantage of the principle of locality by implementing the memory of a computer as a memory hierarchy. A memory hierarchy consists of multiple levels of memory with different speeds and sizes. The faster memories are more expensive per bit than the slower memories and thus are smaller. Figure 5.1 shows the faster memory is close to the processor and the slower, less expensive memory is below it. The goal is to present the user with as much memory as is available in the cheapest technology, while providing access at the speed offered by the fastest memory. The data are similarly hierarchical: a level closer to the processor is generally a subset of any level further away, and all the data are stored at the lowest level. By analogy, the books on your desk form a subset of the library you are working in, which is in turn a subset of all the libraries on campus. Furthermore, as we move away from the processor, the levels take progressively longer to access, just as we might encounter in a hierarchy of campus libraries. A memory hierarchy can consist of multiple levels, but data are copied between only two adjacent levels at a time, so we can focus our attention on just two levels. memory hierarchy  A structure that uses multiple levels of memories; as the distance from the processor increases, the size of the memories and the access time both increase while the cost pert bit decreases. Speed Fastest Slowest Smallest Biggest Size Cost ($/bit) Current technology Highest Lowest SRAM DRAM Magnetic disk or Flash memory Processor Memory Memory Memory FIGURE 5.1  The basic structure of a memory hierarchy. By implementing the memory system as a hierarchy, the user has the illusion of a memory that is as large as the largest level of the hierarchy, but can be accessed as if it were all built from the fastest memory. Flash memory has replaced disks in many personal mobile devices, and may lead to a new level in the storage hierarchy for desktop and server computers; see Section 5.2.

Chapter 5  Large and Fast: Exploiting Memory Hierarchy The upper level—the one closer to the processor—is smaller and faster than the lower level, since the upper level uses technology that is more expensive. Figure 5.2 shows that the minimum unit of information that can be either present or not present in the two-level hierarchy is called a block or a line; in our library analogy, a block of information is one book. If the data requested by the processor appear in some block in the upper level, this is called a hit (analogous to your finding the information in one of the books on your desk). If the data are not found in the upper level, the request is called a miss. The lower level in the hierarchy is then accessed to retrieve the block containing the requested data. (Continuing our analogy, you go from your desk to the shelves to find the desired book.) The hit rate, or hit ratio, is the fraction of memory accesses found in the upper level; it is often used as a measure of the performance of the memory hierarchy. The miss rate (1−hit rate) is the fraction of memory accesses not found in the upper level. Since performance is the major reason for having a memory hierarchy, the time to service hits and misses is important. Hit time is the time to access the upper level of the memory hierarchy, which includes the time needed to determine whether the access is a hit or a miss (that is, the time needed to look through the books on the desk). The miss penalty is the time to replace a block in the upper level with the corresponding block from the lower level, plus the time to deliver this block to the processor (or the time to get another book from the shelves and place it on the desk). Because the upper level is smaller and built using faster memory parts, the hit time will be much smaller than the time to access the next level in the hierarchy, which is the major component of the miss penalty. (The time to examine the books on the desk is much smaller than the time to get a new book from the shelves.) block (or line)  The minimum unit of information that can be either present or not present in a cache. hit rate  The fraction of memory accesses found in a level of the memory hierarchy. miss rate  The fraction of memory accesses not found in a level of the memory hierarchy. hit time  The time required to access a level of the memory hierarchy, including the time needed to determine whether the access is a hit or a miss. miss penalty  The time required to fetch a block into a level of the memory hierarchy from the lower level, including the time to access the block, transmit it from one level to the other, insert it in the level that experienced the miss, and then pass the block to the requestor. Processor Data are transferred FIGURE 5.2  Every pair of levels in the memory hierarchy can be thought of as having an upper and lower level. Within each level, the unit of information that is present or not is called a block or a line. Usually we transfer an entire block when we copy something between levels.

 5.1  Introduction As we will see in this chapter, the concepts used to build memory systems affect many other aspects of a computer, including how the operating system manages memory and I/O, how compilers generate code, and even how applications use the computer. Of course, because all programs spend much of their time accessing memory, the memory system is necessarily a major factor in determining performance. The reliance on memory hierarchies to achieve performance has meant that programmers, who are trained to think of memory as a flat, random access storage device, need to understand that memory is a hierarchy to get good performance. We show how important this understanding is in later examples, such as Figure 5.18 on page 422, and Section 5.14, which shows how to double matrix multiply performance. Since memory systems are critical to performance, computer designers devote a great deal of attention to these systems and develop sophisticated mechanisms for improving the performance of the memory system. In this chapter, we discuss the major conceptual ideas, although we use many simplifications and abstractions to keep the material manageable in length and complexity. Which of the following statements are generally true? 1. Memory hierarchies take advantage of temporal locality. 2. On a read, the value returned depends on which blocks are in the cache. 3. Most of the cost of the memory hierarchy is at the highest level. 4. Most of the capacity of the memory hierarchy is at the lowest level. Programs exhibit both temporal locality, the tendency to reuse recently accessed data items, and spatial locality, the tendency to reference data items that are close to other recently accessed items. Memory hierarchies take advantage of temporal locality by keeping more recently accessed data items closer to the processor. Memory hierarchies take advantage of spatial locality by moving blocks consisting of multiple contiguous words in memory to upper levels of the hierarchy. Figure 5.3 shows that a memory hierarchy uses smaller and faster memory technologies close to the processor. Thus, accesses that hit in the highest level of the hierarchy can be processed quickly. Accesses that miss go to lower levels of the hierarchy, which are larger but slower. If the hit rate is high enough, the memory hierarchy has an effective access time close to that of the highest (and fastest) level and a size equal to that of the lowest (and largest) level. In most systems, the memory is a true hierarchy, meaning that data cannot be present in level i unless they are also present in level i + 1. The BIG Picture Check Yourself

Chapter 5  Large and Fast: Exploiting Memory Hierarchy 5.2 Memory Technologies There are four primary technologies used today in memory hierarchies. Main memory is implemented from DRAM (dynamic random access memory), while levels closer to the processor (caches) use SRAM (static random access memory). DRAM is less costly per bit than SRAM, although it is substantially slower. The price difference arises because DRAM uses significantly less area per bit of memory, and DRAMs thus have larger capacity for the same amount of silicon; the speed difference arises from several factors described in Section A.9 of Appendix A. The third technology is flash memory. This nonvolatile memory is the secondary memory in Personal Mobile Devices. The fourth technology, used to implement the largest and slowest level in the hierarchy in servers, is magnetic disk. The access time and price per bit vary widely among these technologies, as the table below shows, using typical values for 2020. Memory technology Typical access time $ per GiB in 2020 SRAM semiconductor memory 0.5–2.5 ns $500–$1000 DRAM semiconductor memory 50–70 ns $3–$6 Flash semiconductor memory 5,000–50,000 ns $0.06–$0.12 Magnetic disk 5,000,000–20,000,000 ns $0.01–$0.02 We describe each memory technology in the remainder of this section. CPU Level 1 Level 2 Level n Increasing distance from the CPU in access time Levels in the memory hierarchy Size of the memory at each level FIGURE 5.3  This diagram shows the structure of a memory hierarchy: as the distance from the processor increases, so does the size. This structure, with the appropriate operating mechanisms, allows the processor to have an access time that is determined primarily by level 1 of the hierarchy and yet have a memory as large as level n. Maintaining this illusion is the subject of this chapter. Although local storage is normally the bottom of the hierarchy, some systems use tape or a file server over a local area network as the next levels of the hierarchy.

 5.2  Memory Technologies SRAM Technology SRAMs are simply integrated circuits that are memory arrays with (usually) a single access port that can provide either a read or a write. SRAMs have a fixed access time to any datum, though the read and write access times may differ. SRAMs don’t need to refresh and so the access time is very close to the cycle time is the time between memory accesses. SRAMs typically use six to eight transistors per bit to prevent the information from being disturbed when read. SRAM needs only minimal power to retain the charge in standby mode. In the past, most PCs and server systems used separate SRAM chips for either their primary, secondary, or even tertiary caches. Today, thanks to Moore’s Law, all levels of caches are integrated onto the processor chip, so the market for independent SRAM chips has nearly evaporated. DRAM Technology In a SRAM, as long as power is applied, the value can be kept indefinitely. In a dynamic RAM (DRAM), the value kept in a cell is stored as a charge in a capacitor. A single transistor is then used to access this stored charge, either to read the value or to overwrite the charge stored there. Because DRAMs use only one transistor per bit of storage, they are much denser and cheaper per bit than SRAM. As DRAMs store the charge on a capacitor, it cannot be kept indefinitely and must periodically be refreshed. Impersistence is why this memory structure is called dynamic, in contrast to the static storage in an SRAM cell. To refresh the cell, we merely read its contents and write it back. The charge can be kept for several milliseconds. If every bit had to be read out of the DRAM and then written back individually, we would constantly be refreshing the DRAM, leaving no time for accessing it. Fortunately, DRAMs use a two-level decoding structure, and this allows us to refresh an entire row (which shares a word line) with a read cycle followed immediately by a write cycle. Figure 5.4 shows the internal organization of a DRAM, and Figure 5.5 shows how the density, cost, and access time of DRAMs have changed over the years. The row organization that helps with refresh also helps with performance. To improve performance, DRAMs buffer rows for repeated access. The buffer acts like an SRAM; by changing the address, random bits can be accessed in the buffer until the next row access. This capability improves the access time significantly, since the access time to bits in the row is much faster. Making the chip wider also improves the memory bandwidth of the chip. When the row is in the buffer, it can be transferred by successive addresses at whatever the width of the DRAM is (typically 4, 8, or 16 bits), or by specifying a block transfer and the starting address within the buffer. To improve the interface to processors further, DRAMs added clocks and are properly called synchronous DRAMs or SDRAMs. The advantage of SDRAMs is that the use of a clock eliminates the time for the memory and processor to synchronize. The speed advantage of synchronous DRAMs comes from the ability 

Chapter 5  Large and Fast: Exploiting Memory Hierarchy to transfer the bits in the burst without having to specify additional address bits. Instead, the clock transfers the successive bits in a burst. It is called Double Data Rate (DDR) SDRAM. The name means data transfers on both the rising and falling edge of the clock, thereby getting twice as much bandwidth as you might expect based on the clock rate and the data width. The latest version of this technology Column Rd/Wr Pre Act Row Bank FIGURE 5.4  Internal organization of a DRAM. Modern DRAMs are organized in banks, typically four for DDR4. Each bank consists of a series of rows. Sending a PRE (precharge) command opens or closes a bank. A row address is sent with an Act (activate), which causes the row to transfer to a buffer. When the row is in the buffer, it can be transferred by successive column addresses at whatever the width of the DRAM is (typically 4, 8, or 16 bits in DDR4 or by specifying a block transfer and the starting address. Each command, as well as block transfers, is synchronized with a clock. Year introduced Chip size $ per GiB Total access time to a new row/column 64 Kibibit $6,480,000 250 ns 256 Kibibit $1,980,000 185 ns 1 Mebibit $720,000 135 ns 4 Mebibit $128,000 110 ns 16 Mebibit $30,000 90 ns 64 Mebibit $9,000 60 ns 128 Mebibit $900 60 ns 256 Mebibit $840 55 ns 512 Mebibit $150 50 ns 1 Gibibit $40 45 ns 2 Gibibit $13 40 ns 4 Gibibit $5 35 ns Average column access time to existing row 150 ns 100 ns 40 ns 40 ns 30 ns 12 ns 10 ns 7 ns 5 ns 1.25 ns 1 ns 0.8 ns 8 Gibibit $7 30 ns 16 Gibibit $6 25 ns 0.6 ns 0.4 ns FIGURE 5.5  DRAM size increased by multiples of four approximately once every 3 years until 1996, and thereafter considerably slower. The improvements in access time have been slower but continuous, and cost roughly tracks density improvements, although cost is often affected by other issues, such as availability and demand. The cost per gibibyte is not adjusted for inflation. Price source is https:// jcmit.net/memoryprice.htm.

 5.2  Memory Technologies is called DDR4. A DDR4-3200 DRAM can do 3,200 million transfers per second, which means it has a 1600-MHz clock. Sustaining that much bandwidth requires clever organization inside the DRAM. Instead of just one faster row buffer, the DRAM can be internally organized to read or write from multiple banks, with each having its own row buffer. Sending an address to several banks permits them all to read or write simultaneously. For example, with four banks, there is just one access time and then accesses rotate between the four banks to supply four times the bandwidth. This rotating access scheme is called address interleaving. Although personal mobile devices like the iPad (see Chapter 1) use individual DRAMs, memory for servers is commonly sold on small boards called dual inline memory modules (DIMMs). DIMMs typically contain 4–16 DRAMs, and they are normally organized to be 8 bytes wide for server systems. A DIMM using DDR4-3200 SDRAMs could transfer at 8 × 3200 = 25,600 megabytes per second. Such DIMMs are named after their bandwidth: PC25600. Since a DIMM can have so many DRAM chips that only a portion of them are used for a particular transfer, we need a term to refer to the subset of chips in a DIMM that share common address lines. To avoid confusion with the internal DRAM names of row and banks, we use the term memory rank for such a subset of chips in a DIMM. Elaboration:  One way to measure the performance of the memory system behind the caches is the Stream benchmark [McCalpin, 1995]. It measures the performance of long vector operations. They have no temporal locality and they access arrays that are larger than the cache of the computer being tested. Flash Memory Flash memory is a type of electrically erasable programmable read-only memory (EEPROM). Unlike disks and DRAM, but like other EEPROM technologies, writes can wear out flash memory bits. To cope with such limits, most flash products include a controller to spread the writes by remapping blocks that have been written many times to less trodden blocks. This technique is called wear leveling. With wear leveling, personal mobile devices are very unlikely to exceed the write limits in the flash. Such wear leveling lowers the potential performance of flash, but it is needed unless higher-level software monitors block wear. Flash controllers that perform wear leveling can also improve yield by mapping out memory cells that were manufactured incorrectly. Disk Memory As Figure 5.6 shows, a magnetic hard disk consists of a collection of platters, which rotate on a spindle at 5400 to 15,000 revolutions per minute. The metal platters are covered with magnetic recording material on both sides, similar to the material 

Chapter 5  Large and Fast: Exploiting Memory Hierarchy found on a cassette or videotape. To read and write information on a hard disk, a movable arm containing a small electromagnetic coil called a read-write head is located just above each surface. The entire drive is permanently sealed to control the environment inside the drive, which, in turn, allows the disk heads to be much closer to the drive surface. Each disk surface is divided into concentric circles, called tracks. There are typically tens of thousands of tracks per surface. Each track is in turn divided into sectors that contain the information; each track may have thousands of sectors. Sectors are typically 512 to 4096 bytes in size. The sequence recorded on the magnetic media is a sector number, a gap, the information for that sector including error correction code (see Section 5.5), a gap, the sector number of the next sector, and so on. The disk heads for each surface are connected together and move in conjunction, so that every head is over the same track of every surface. The term cylinder is used to refer to all the tracks under the heads at a given point on all surfaces. sector  One of the segments that make up a track on a magnetic disk; a sector is the smallest amount of information that is read or written on a disk. FIGURE 5.6  A disk showing 10 disk platters and the read/write heads. The diameter of today’s disks is 2.5 or 3.5 inches, and there are typically one or two platters per drive today. track  One of thousands of concentric circles that make up the surface of a magnetic disk.

 5.2  Memory Technologies To access data, the operating system must direct the disk through a three-stage process. The first step is to position the head over the proper track. This operation is called a seek, and the time to move the head to the desired track is called the seek time. Disk manufacturers report minimum seek time, maximum seek time, and average seek time in their manuals. The first two are easy to measure, but the average is open to wide interpretation because it depends on the seek distance. The industry calculates average seek time as the sum of the time for all possible seeks divided by the number of possible seeks. Average seek times are usually advertised as 3 ms to 13 ms, but, depending on the application and scheduling of disk requests, the actual average seek time may be only 25% to 33% of the advertised number because of the locality of disk references. This locality arises both because of successive accesses to the same file and because the operating system tries to schedule such accesses together. Once the head has reached the correct track, we must wait for the desired sector to rotate under the read/write head. This time is called the rotational latency or rotational delay. The average latency to the desired information is halfway around the disk. Disks rotate at 5400 RPM to 15,000 RPM. The average rotational latency at 5400 RPM is Average rotational latency rotation RPM rotati 0 5 0 5 on RPM/ seconds minute seconds ms 0 0056 5 6 . .      . . = = = = The last component of a disk access, transfer time, is the time to transfer a block of bits. The transfer time is a function of the sector size, the rotation speed, and the recording density of a track. Transfer rates in 2020 were between 150 and 250 MB/ sec. One complication is that most disk controllers have a built-in cache that stores sectors as they are passed over; transfer rates from the cache are typically higher, and were up to 1500 MB/sec (12 Gbit/sec) in 2020. Alas, where blocks are located is no longer intuitive. The assumptions of the sector-track-cylinder model above are that nearby blocks are on the same track, blocks in the same cylinder take less time to access since there is no seek time, and some tracks are closer than others. The reason for the change was the raising of the level of the disk interfaces. To speed-up sequential transfers, these higher- level interfaces organize disks more like tapes than like random access devices. The logical blocks are ordered in serpentine fashion across a single surface, trying to capture all the sectors that are recorded at the same bit density to try to get best performance. Hence, blocks with sequential addresses may be on different tracks. seek  The process of positioning a read/write head over the proper track on a disk. rotational latency  Also called rotational delay. The time required for the desired sector of a disk to rotate under the read/write head; usually assumed to be half the rotation time.

Chapter 5  Large and Fast: Exploiting Memory Hierarchy In summary, the two primary differences between magnetic disks and semiconductor memory technologies are that disks have a slower access time because they are mechanical devices—flash latency is 1000 times as fast and DRAM is 100,000 times as fast—yet they are cheaper per bit because they have very high storage capacity at a modest cost—disks are 6 to 300 times cheaper. Magnetic disks are nonvolatile like flash, but unlike flash there is no write wear-out problem. However, flash is much more rugged and hence a better match to the jostling inherent in personal mobile devices. 5.3 The Basics of Caches In our library example, the desk acted as a cache—a safe place to store things (books) that we needed to examine. Cache was the name chosen to represent the level of the memory hierarchy between the processor and main memory in the first commercial computer to have this extra level. The memories in the datapath in Chapter 4 are simply replaced by caches. Today, although this remains the dominant use of the word cache, the term is also used to refer to any storage managed to take advantage of locality of access. Caches first appeared in research computers in the early 1960s and in production computers later in that same decade; every general- purpose computer built now from servers to low-power embedded processors, includes caches. In this section, we begin by looking at a very simple cache in which the processor requests are each one word, and the blocks also consist of a single word. (Readers already familiar with cache basics may want to skip to Section 5.4.) Figure 5.7 shows such a simple cache, before and after requesting a data item that is not initially in the cache. Before the request, the cache contains a collection of recent references X1, X2, …, Xn−1, and the processor requests a word Xn that is not in the cache. This request results in a miss, and the word Xn is brought from memory into the cache. In looking at the scenario in Figure 5.7, there are two questions to answer: How do we know if a data item is in the cache? Moreover, if it is, how do we find it? The answers are related. If each word can go in exactly one place in the cache, then it is straightforward to find the word if it is in the cache. The simplest way to assign a location in the cache for each word in memory is to assign the cache location based on the address of the word in memory. This cache structure is called direct mapped, since each memory location is mapped directly to exactly one location in the cache. The typical mapping between addresses and cache locations for a direct-mapped cache is usually simple. For example, almost all direct-mapped caches use this mapping to find a block: Cache: a safe place for hiding or storing things. Webster’s New World Dictionary of the American Language, Third College Edition, direct-mapped cache  A cache structure in which each memory location is mapped to exactly one location in the cache.

 5.3  The Basics of Caches X4 X1 Xn – 2 Xn – 1 X2 X3 a. Before the reference to Xn X4 X1 Xn – 2 Xn – 1 X2 X3 b. After the reference to Xn Xn FIGURE 5.7  The cache just before and just after a reference to a word Xn that is not initially in the cache. This reference causes a miss that forces the cache to fetch Xn from memory and insert it into the cache. ( ) Block address modulo (Number of blocks in the cache) If the number of entries in the cache is a power of 2, then modulo can be computed simply by using the low-order log2 (cache size in blocks) bits of the address. Thus, an 8-block cache uses the three lowest bits (8 = 23) of the block address. For example, Figure 5.8 shows how the memory addresses between 1ten (00001two) and 29ten (11101two) map to locations 1ten (001two) and 5ten (101two) in a direct-mapped cache of eight words. Because each cache location can contain the contents of a number of different memory locations, how do we know whether the data in the cache corresponds to a requested word? That is, how do we know whether a requested word is in the cache or not? We answer this question by adding a set of tags to the cache. The tags contain the address information required to identify whether a word in the cache corresponds to the requested word. The tag needs just to contain the upper portion of the address, corresponding to the bits that are not used as an index into the cache. For example, in Figure 5.8 we need only have the upper two of the five address bits in the tag, since the lower 3-bit index field of the address selects the block. Architects omit the index bits because they are redundant, since by definition, the index field of any address of a cache block must be that block number. We also need a way to recognize that a cache block does not have valid information. For instance, when a processor starts up, the cache does not have good data, and the tag fields will be meaningless. Even after executing many instructions, some of the cache entries may still be empty, as in Figure 5.7. Thus, we need to know that the tag should be ignored for such entries. The most common method is to add a valid bit to indicate whether an entry contains a valid address. If the bit is not set, there cannot be a match for this block. tag  A field in a table used for a memory hierarchy that contains the address information required to identify whether the associated block in the hierarchy corresponds to a requested word. valid bit  A field in the tables of a memory hierarchy that indicates that the associated block in the hierarchy contains valid data.

Chapter 5  Large and Fast: Exploiting Memory Hierarchy For the rest of this section, we will focus on explaining how a cache deals with reads. In general, handling reads is a little simpler than handling writes, since reads do not have to change the contents of the cache. After seeing the basics of how reads work and how cache misses can be handled, we’ll examine the cache designs for real computers and detail how these caches handle writes. Caching is perhaps the most important example of the big idea of prediction. It relies on the principle of locality to try to find the desired data in the higher levels of the memory hierarchy, and provides mechanisms to ensure that when the prediction is wrong it finds and uses the proper data from the lower levels of the memory hierarchy. The hit rates of the cache prediction on modern computers are often above 95% (see Figure 5.46). The BIG Picture Cache Memory FIGURE 5.8  A direct-mapped cache with eight entries showing the addresses of memory words between 0 and 31 that map to the same cache locations. Because there are eight words in the cache, an address X maps to the direct-mapped cache word X modulo 8. That is, the low-order log2(8) = 3 bits are used as the cache index. Thus, addresses 00001two, 01001two, 10001two, and 11001two all map to entry 001two of the cache, while addresses 00101two, 01101two, 10101two, and 11101two all map to entry 101two of the cache.

 5.3  The Basics of Caches Accessing a Cache Below is a sequence of nine memory references to an empty eight-block cache, including the action for each reference. Figure 5.9 shows how the contents of the cache change on each miss. Since there are eight blocks in the cache, the low-order 3 bits of an address give the block number: Decimal address of reference Binary address of reference Hit or miss in cache Assigned cache block (where found or placed) 10110two miss (5.9b) (10110two mod 8) = 110two 11010two miss (5.9c) (11010two mod 8) = 010two 10110two hit (10110two mod 8) = 110two 11010two hit (11010two mod 8) = 010two 10000two miss (5.9d) (10000two mod 8) = 000two 00011two miss (5.9e) (00011two mod 8) = 011two 10000two hit (10000two mod 8) = 000two 10010two miss (5.9f) (10010two mod 8) = 010two 10000two hit (10000two mod 8) = 000two Since the cache is empty, several of the first references are misses; the caption of Figure 5.9 describes the actions for each memory reference. On the eighth reference we have conflicting demands for a block. The word at address 18 (10010two) should be brought into cache block 2 (010two). Hence, it must replace the word at address 26 (11010two), which is already in cache block 2 (010two). This behavior allows a cache to take advantage of temporal locality: recently referenced words replace less recently referenced words. This situation is directly analogous to needing a book from the shelves and having no more space on your desk—some book already on your desk must be returned to the shelves. In a direct-mapped cache, there is only one place to put the newly requested item and hence just one choice of what to replace. We know where to look in the cache for each possible address: the low-order bits of an address can be used to find the unique cache entry to which the address could map. Figure 5.10 shows how a referenced address is divided into ■ A tag field, which is used to compare with the value of the tag field of the cache ■ A cache index, which is used to select the block The index of a cache block, together with the tag contents of that block, uniquely specifies the memory address of the word contained in the cache block. Because the index field is used as an address to reference the cache, and because an n-bit field has 2n values, the total number of entries in a direct-mapped cache must be a power of 2. Since words are aligned to multiples of four bytes, the least significant two bits of every address specify a byte within a word. Hence, if the words are aligned in memory, the least significant two bits can be ignored when selecting a 

Chapter 5  Large and Fast: Exploiting Memory Hierarchy