OPERATING SYSTEMS INTERNALS AND DESIGN PRINCIPLES SIXTH EDITION William Stallings Upper Saddle River, New Jersey 07458

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data on File Vice President and Editorial Director, ECS: Marcia J. Horton Executive Editor: Tracy Dunkelberger Associate Editor: ReeAnne Davis Editorial Assistant: Christianna Lee Managing Editor: Scott Disanno Production Editor: Rose Kernan Director of Creative Services: Paul Belfanti Creative Director: Juan Lopez Cover Designer: Kenny Beck Managing Editor,AV Management and Production: Patricia Burns Art Editor: Gregory Dulles Director, Imange Resouce Center: Melinda Reo Manager, Rights and Permissions: Zina Arabia Manager, Visual Research: Beth Brenzel Manager, Cover Visual Research and Permissions: Karen Sanatar Manufacturing Manager, ESM: Alexis Heydt-Long Manufacturing Buyer: Lisa McDowell Marketing Manager: Mack Patterson © 2009 Pearson Education, Inc. Pearson Prentice Hall Pearson Education, Inc. Upper Saddle River, NJ 07458 All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing from the publisher. Pearson Prentice Hall™ is a trademark of Pearson Education, Inc. All other trademarks or product names are the property of their respective owners. The author and publisher of this book have used their best efforts in preparing this book.These efforts include the develop- ment, research, and testing of the theories and programs to determine their effectiveness.The author and publisher make no warranty of any kind, expressed or implied, with regard to these programs or the documentation contained in this book.The author and publisher shall not be liable in any event for incidental or consequential damages in connection with, or arising out of, the furnishing, performance, or use of these programs. Printed in the United States of America 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 ISBN: 0-13-600632-9 978-0-13-600632-9 Pearson Education Ltd., London Pearson Educación de Mexico, S.A. de C.V. Pearson Education Australia Pty. Ltd., Sydney Pearson Education—Japan, Tokyo Pearson Education Singapore, Pte. Ltd. Pearson Education Malaysia, Pte. Ltd. Pearson Education North Asia Ltd., Hong Kong Pearson Education, Inc., Upper Saddle River, New Jersey Pearson Education Canada, Inc., Toronto

As always, for my loving and brilliant wife A. and her constant companion Geoffroi

WEB SITE FOR OPERATING SYSTEMS: INTERNALS AND DESIGN PRINCIPLES, SIXTH EDITION The Web site at WilliamStallings.com/OS/OS6e.html provides support for instructors and students using the book. It includes the following elements. Course Support Materials The course support materials include • Copies of figures from the book in PDF format. • Copies of tables from the book in PDF format. • A set of PowerPoint slides for use as lecture aids. • Lecture notes in HTML that can serve as a useful study aid. • Computer Science Student Resource Site: contains a number of links and docu- ments that students may find useful in their ongoing computer science education. The site includes a review of basic,relevant mathematics;advice on research,writ- ing,and doing homework problems;links to computer science research resources, such as report repositories and bibliographies;and other useful links. • An errata sheet for the book, updated at most monthly. Supplemental Documents The supplemental documents include • A set of supplemental homework problems with solutions. Students can en- hance their understanding of the material by working out the solutions to these problems and then checking their answers. • Tutorial documents on C, including C for Java programmers. • Two online chapters: networking and distributed process management • Six online appendices that expand on the treatment in the book.Topics in- clude complexity of algorithms, Internet standards, and Sockets • A PDF copy of all the algorithms in the book in an easy-to-read Pascal-like pseudocode. • All of the Windows, UNIX, and Linux material from the book reproduced in three PDF documents for easy reference. OS Courses The Web site includes links to Web sites for courses taught using the book. These sites can provide useful ideas about scheduling and topic ordering, as well as a num- ber of useful handouts and other materials. Useful Web Sites The Web site includes links to relevant Web sites. The links cover a broad spectrum of topics and will enable students to explore timely issues in greater depth. Internet Mailing List An Internet mailing list is maintained so that instructors using this book can ex- change information, suggestions, and questions with each other and the author. Sub- scription information is provided at the book’s Web site. Operating System Projects The Web site includes links to the Nachos and BACI web sites.These are two software packages that serve as frameworks for project implementation.Each site includes down- loadable software and background information. See Appendix C for more information. T

CONTENTS Preface xiii Chapter 0 Reader’s Guide 1 0.1 Outline of the Book 2 0.2 A Roadmap for Readers and Instructors 3 0.3 Internet and Web Resources 4 PART ONE BACKGROUND 6 Chapter 1 Computer System Overview 7 1.1 Basic Elements 8 1.2 Processor Registers 9 1.3 Instruction Execution 12 1.4 Interrupts 15 1.5 The Memory Hierarchy 26 1.6 Cache Memory 29 1.7 I/O Communication Techniques 33 1.8 Recommended Reading and Web Sites 36 1.9 Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems 37 Appendix 1A Performance Characteristics of Two-Level Memory 39 Appendix 1B Procedure Control 46 Chapter 2 Operating System Overview 50 2.1 Operating System Objectives and Functions 51 2.2 The Evolution of Operating Systems 55 2.3 Major Achievements 64 2.4 Developments Leading to Modern Operating Systems 77 2.5 Microsoft Windows Overview 80 2.6 Traditional UNIX Systems 90 2.7 Modern UNIX Systems 93 2.8 Linux 94 2.9 Recommended Reading and Web Sites 100 2.10 Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems 101 PART TWO PROCESSES 105 Chapter 3 Process Description and Control 107 3.1 What is a Process? 108 3.2 Process States 111 3.3 Process Description 126 3.4 Process Control 135 3.5 Execution of the Operating System 140 3.6 Security Issues 143 3.7 UNIX SVR4 Process Management 147 v

vi CONTENTS 3.8 Summary 152 3.9 Recommended Reading 153 3.10 Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems 153 Programming Project One Developing a Shell 157 Chapter 4 Threads, SMP, and Microkernels 160 4.1 Processes and Threads 161 4.2 Symmetric Multiprocessing (SMP) 175 4.3 Microkernels 179 4.4 Windows Vista Thread and SMP Management 185 4.5 Solaris Thread and SMP Management 190 4.6 Linux Process and Thread Management 195 4.7 Summary 198 4.8 Recommended Reading 198 4.9 Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems 199 Chapter 5 Concurrency: Mutual Exclusion and Synchronization 206 5.1 Principles of Concurrency 207 5.2 Mutual Exclusion: Hardware Support 216 5.3 Semaphores 219 5.4 Monitors 232 5.5 Message Passing 239 5.6 Readers/Writers Problem 245 5.7 Summary 249 5.8 Recommended Reading 250 5.9 Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems 251 Chapter 6 Concurrency: Deadlock and Starvation 262 6.1 Principles of Deadlock 263 6.2 Deadlock Prevention 272 6.3 Deadlock Avoidance 273 6.4 Deadlock Detection 279 6.5 An Integrated Deadlock Strategy 281 6.6 Dining Philosophers Problem 282 6.7 UNIX Concurrency Mechanisms 286 6.8 Linux Kernel Concurrency Mechanisms 289 6.9 Solaris Thread Synchronization Primitives 295 6.10 Windows Vista Concurrency Mechanisms 298 6.11 Summary 302 6.12 Recommended Reading 302 6.13 Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems 303 PART THREE MEMORY 309 Chapter 7 Memory Management 311 7.1 Memory Management Requirements 312 7.2 Memory Partitioning 315 7.3 Paging 326 7.4 Segmentation 330

CONTENTS vii 7.5 Security Issues 331 7.6 Summary 335 7.7 Recommended Reading 335 7.8 Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems 336 Appendix 7A Loading and Linking 338 Chapter 8 Virtual Memory 345 8.1 Hardware and Control Structures 346 8.2 Operating System Software 365 8.3 UNIX and Solaris Memory Management 383 8.4 Linux Memory Management 389 8.5 Windows Vista Memory Management 391 8.6 Summary 394 8.7 Recommended Reading and Web Sites 395 8.8 Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems 396 Appendix 8A Hash Tables 400 PART FOUR SCHEDULING 404 Chapter 9 Uniprocessor Scheduling 405 9.1 Types of Scheduling 406 9.2 Scheduling Algorithms 410 9.3 Traditional UNIX Scheduling 432 9.4 Summary 434 9.5 Recommended Reading 434 9.6 Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems 435 Appendix 9A Response Time 438 Appendix 9B Queuing Systems 440 Programming Project TwoThe HOST Dispatcher Shell 447 Chapter 10 Multiprocessor and Real-Time Scheduling 452 10.1 Multiprocessor Scheduling 453 10.2 Real-Time Scheduling 466 10.3 Linux Scheduling 481 10.4 UNIX FreeBSD Scheduling 485 10.5 Windows Vista Scheduling 487 10.6 Summary 490 10.7 Recommended Reading 490 10.8 Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems 491 PART FIVE INPUT/OUTPUT AND FILES 494 Chapter 11 I/O Management and Disk Scheduling 495 11.1 I/O Devices 496 11.2 Organization of the I/O Function 497 11.3 Operating System Design Issues 501 11.4 I/O Buffering 504 11.5 Disk Scheduling 507 11.6 RAID 514

viii CONTENTS 11.7 Disk Cache 523 11.8 UNIX FreeBSD I/O 526 11.9 Linux I/O 529 11.10 Windows Vista I/O 533 11.11 Summary 536 11.12 Recommended Reading 536 11.13 Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems 538 Appendix 11A Disk Storage Devices 540 Chapter 12 File Management 521 12.1 Overview 552 12.2 File Organization and Access 558 12.3 File Directories 562 12.4 File Sharing 567 12.5 Record Blocking 568 12.6 Secondary Storage Management 570 12.7 File System Security 578 12.8 UNIX File Management 580 12.9 Linux File Management 587 12.10 Windows Vista File System 591 12.11 Summary 597 12.12 Recommended Reading 597 12.13 Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems 598 PART SIX EMBEDDED SYSTEMS 601 Chapter 13 Embedded Operating Systems 602 13.1 Embedded Systems 603 13.2 Characteristics of Embedded Operating Systems 605 13.3 eCOS 607 13.4 TinyOS 622 13.5 Recommended Reading and Web Sites 631 13.6 Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems 632 PART SEVEN SECURITY 634 Chapter 14 Computer Security Threats 635 14.1 Computer Security Concepts 636 14.2 Threats,Attacks, and Assets 638 14.3 Intruders 643 14.4 Malicious Software Overview 647 14.5 Viruses,Worms, and Bots 651 14.6 Rootkits 661 14.7 Recommended Readings and Web Sites 663 14.8 Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems 664

CONTENTS ix Chapter 15 Computer Security Techniques 667 15.1 Authentication 668 15.2 Access Control 675 15.3 Intrusion Detection 680 15.4 Malware Defense 686 15.5 Dealing with Buffer Overflow Attacks 692 15.6 Windows Vista Security 697 15.7 Recommended Readings and Web Sites 701 15.8 Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems 703 PART EIGHT DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS 707 Chapter 16 Distributed Processing, Client/Server, and Clusters 710 16.1 Client/Server Computing 711 16.2 Distributed Message Passing 722 16.3 Remote Procedure Calls 724 16.4 Clusters 728 16.5 Windows Vista Cluster Server 733 16.6 Sun Cluster 735 16.7 Beowulf and Linux Clusters 738 16.8 Summary 740 16.9 Recommended Reading 740 16.10 Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems 742 APPENDICES Appendix A Topics in Concurrency 744 A.1 Mutual Exclusion: Software Approaches 745 A.2 Race Conditions and Semaphores 751 A.3 A Barbershop Problem 758 A.4 Problems 764 Appendix B Object-Oriented Design 765 B.1 Motivation 766 B.2 Object-Oriented Concepts 767 B.3 Benefits of Object-Oriented Design 772 B.4 CORBA 772 B.5 Recommended Reading and Web Site 776 Appendix C Programming and Operating System Projects 777 C.1 Animations and Animation Projects 778 C.2 Simulations 779 C.3 Programming Projects 780 C.4 Research Projects 782 C.5 Reading/Report Assignments 782

x CONTENTS C.6 Writing Assignments 782 C.7 Documentation Projects 783 C.8 BACI and Nachos 783 ONLINE CHAPTERS AND APPENDICES Chapter 17 Networking 17.1 The Need for a Protocol Architecture 17.2 The TCP/IP Protocol Architecture 17.3 Sockets 17.4 Linux Networking 17.5 Summary 17.6 Recommended Reading and Web Sites 17.7 Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems Appendix 17A The Trivial File Transfer Protocol Chapter 18 Distributed Process Management 18.1 Process Migration 18.2 Distributed Global States 18.3 Distributed Mutual Exclusion 18.4 Distributed Deadlock 18.5 Summary 18.6 Recommended Reading 18.7 Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems Appendix D The Complexity of Algorithms Appendix E Standards Organizations E.1 The Importance of Standards E.2 Standards and Regulation E.3 Standards-Setting Organizations Appendix F Cryptographic Algorithms F.1 Symmetric Encryption F.2 Public-Key Cryptography F.3 Secure Hash Functions Appendix G The International Reference Alphabet Appendix H BACI:The Ben-Ari Concurrent Programming System H.1 Introduction H.2 BACI H.3 Examples of BACI Programs H.4 BACI Projects H.5 Enhancements to the BACK System Appendix I Sockets: A Programmer’s Introduction I.1 Versions of Sockets I.2 Sockets, Socket Descriptors, Ports, and Connections

CONTENTS xi I.3 The Client/Server Model of Communication I.4 Sockets Elements I.5 Stream and Datagram Sockets I.6 Run-Time Program Control I.7 Remote Execution of a Windows Console Application Glossary 785 References 795 Index 813

This page intentionally left blank 

PREFACE OBJECTIVES This book is about the concepts, structure, and mechanisms of operating systems. Its purpose is to present, as clearly and completely as possible, the nature and characteristics of modern- day operating systems. This task is challenging for several reasons. First, there is a tremendous range and vari- ety of computer systems for which operating systems are designed.These include single-user workstations and personal computers, medium-sized shared systems, large mainframe and supercomputers, and specialized machines such as real-time systems. The variety is not just in the capacity and speed of machines, but in applications and system support requirements. Second, the rapid pace of change that has always characterized computer systems continues with no letup.A number of key areas in operating system design are of recent origin, and re- search into these and other new areas continues. In spite of this variety and pace of change, certain fundamental concepts apply consis- tently throughout.To be sure, the application of these concepts depends on the current state of technology and the particular application requirements. The intent of this book is to pro- vide a thorough discussion of the fundamentals of operating system design and to relate these to contemporary design issues and to current directions in the development of operat- ing systems. EXAMPLE SYSTEMS This text is intended to acquaint the reader with the design principles and implementation is- sues of contemporary operating systems. Accordingly, a purely conceptual or theoretical treatment would be inadequate.To illustrate the concepts and to tie them to real-world design choices that must be made, three operating systems have been chosen as running examples: Windows Vista: A multitasking operating system for personal computers, workstations, and servers.This operating system incorporates many of the latest developments in op- erating system technology. In addition, Windows is one of the first important commer- cial operating systems to rely heavily on object-oriented design principles. This book covers the technology used in the most recent versions of Windows, known as Vista. UNIX: A multiuser operating system, originally intended for minicomputers, but im- plemented on a wide range of machines from powerful microcomputers to supercom- puters. Several flavors of UNIX are included. FreeBSD is a widely used system that incorporates many state-of-the-art features. Solaris is a widely used commercial ver- sion of UNIX. Linux: An open-source version of UNIX that is now widely used. These systems were chosen because of their relevance and representativeness.The dis- cussion of the example systems is distributed throughout the text rather than assembled as a single chapter or appendix. Thus, during the discussion of concurrency, the concurrency xiii

xiv PREFACE mechanisms of each example system are described, and the motivation for the individual de- sign choices is discussed. With this approach, the design concepts discussed in a given chap- ter are immediately reinforced with real-world examples. INTENDED AUDIENCE The book is intended for both an academic and a professional audience. As a textbook, it is intended as a one-semester undergraduate course in operating systems for computer sci- ence, computer engineering, and electrical engineering majors. It covers the topics recom- mended in Computer Curricula 2001, from the Joint Task Force on Computing Curricula of the IEEE Computer Society and the ACM, for the Undergraduate Program in Computer Science. The book also covers the operating systems topics recommended in the Guidelines for Associate-Degree Curricula in Computer Science 2002, also from the Joint Task Force on Computing Curricula of the IEEE Computer Society and the ACM.The book also serves as a basic reference volume and is suitable for self-study. PLAN OF THE TEXT The book is divided into eight parts (see Chapter 0 for an overview): • Background • Processes • Memory • Scheduling • Input/output and files • Embedded systems • Security • Distributed systems The book includes a number of pedagogic features, including the use of animation and numerous figures and tables to clarify the discussion. Each chapter includes a list of key words, review questions, homework problems, suggestions for further reading, and recom- mended Web sites. In addition, a test bank is available to instructors. INSTRUCTIONAL SUPPORT MATERIALS The following instructor materials can be accessed at the password protected Instructor Resources area of the Pearson web site via www.prenhall.com/stallings. • Solutions manual: Solutions to end-of-chapter Review Questions and Problems • PowerPoint slides: A set of slides covering all chapters, suitable for use in lecturing • PDF files: Reproductions of all figures and tables from the book • Projects manual: Suggested project assignments for all of the project categories listed below • GOAL: In addition, instructors should examine GOAL (Gradiance Online Accelerated Learning), Pearson’s premier online homework and assessment system. GOAL is

PREFACE xv designed to minimize student frustration while providing an interactive teaching expe- rience outside the classroom. With GOAL’s immediate feedback, hints, and pointers that map back to the textbook, students will have a more efficient and effective learn- ing experience. GOAL delivers immediate assessment and feedback via two kinds of assignments: multiple choice Homework exercises and interactive Lab work. All of these support materials are available at the Instructor Resource Center (IRC) for this textbook. To gain access to the IRC, please contact your local Prentice Hall sales repre- sentative via prenhall.com/replocator or call Prentice Hall Faculty Services at 1-800-526-0485. INTERNET SERVICES FOR INSTRUCTORS AND STUDENTS There is a Web site for this book that provides support for students and instructors. The site includes links to other relevant sites and a set of useful documents. See the section, “Web Site for Operating Systems: Internals and Design Principles,” preceding this Preface, for more information.The Web page is at http://williamstallings.com/OS/OS6e.html New to this edition is a set of homework problems with solutions publicly available at this Web site. Students can enhance their understanding of the material by working out the solutions to these problems and then checking their answers. An Internet mailing list has been set up so that instructors using this book can ex- change information, suggestions, and questions with each other and with the author.As soon as typos or other errors are discovered, an errata list for this book will be available at WilliamStallings.com. Finally, I maintain the Computer Science Student Resource Site at WilliamStallings.com/StudentSupport.html. PROJECTS AND OTHER STUDENT EXERCISES For many instructors, an important component of an OS course is a project or set of projects by which the student gets hands-on experience to reinforce concepts from the text. This book provides an unparalleled degree of support for including a projects component in the course. In the body of the text, two major programming projects are defined.The instructor’s support materials available through Prentice Hall not only includes guidance on how to as- sign and structure the projects but also includes a set of user’s manuals for various project types plus specific assignments, all written especially for this book. Instructors can assign work in the following areas: • Animations: Described below. • Simulation projects: Described below. • Programming projects: Described below. • Research projects: A series of research assignments that instruct the student to re- search a particular topic on the Internet and write a report. • Reading/report assignments: A list of papers that can be assigned for reading and writing a report, plus suggested assignment wording. • Writing assignments: A list of writing assignments to facilitate learning the material. • Discussion topics: These topics can be used in a classroom, chat room, or message board environment to explore certain areas in greater depth and to foster student collaboration.

xvi PREFACE In addition, information is provided on two software packages that serve as frameworks for project implementation: Nachos for developing components of an OS, and BACI for study- ing concurrency mechanisms. This diverse set of projects and other student exercises enables the instructor to use the book as one component in a rich and varied learning experience and to tailor a course plan to meet the specific needs of the instructor and students. See Appendix C in this book for details. ANIMATIONS AND SIMULATIONS New to this edition is the incorporation of animations and simulations. The animations are set off by this icon . Animations provide a powerful tool for understanding the complex mechanisms of a modern OS. A total of 16 animations are used to illustrate key functions and algorithms in OS design.At the relevant point in the book, an icon indicates that a rele- vant animation is available online for student use. The IRC also provides support for assigning projects based on a set of seven simulations that cover key areas of OS design. The student can use a set of simulation packages to analyze OS design features. The simulators are all written in Java and can be run either locally as a Java application or online through a browser.The IRC includes spe- cific assignments to give to students, telling them specifically what they are to do and what results are expected. PROGRAMMING PROJECTS This new edition provides expanded support for programming projects. Two major pro- gramming projects, one to build a shell, or command line interpreter, and one to build a process dispatcher are described in the textbook, after Chapter 3 and after Chapter 9.The IRC provides further information and step-by-step exercises for developing the pro- grams. As an alternative, the instructor can assign a more extensive series of projects that cover many of the principles in the book. The student is provided with detailed instructions for doing each of the projects. In addition, there is a set of homework problems, which in- volve questions related to each project for the student to answer. Finally, the project manual provided at the IRC includes a series of programming pro- jects that cover a broad range of topics and that can be implemented in any suitable lan- guage on any platform. WHAT’S NEW IN THE SIXTH EDITION In the four years since the fifth edition of this book was published, the field has seen contin- ued innovations and improvements. In this new edition, I try to capture these changes while maintaining a broad and comprehensive coverage of the entire field.To begin the process of revision, the fifth edition of this book was extensively reviewed by a number of professors who teach the subject and by professionals working in the field. The result is that, in many

PREFACE xvii places, the narrative has been clarified and tightened, and illustrations have been improved. Also, a number of new “field-tested” homework problems have been added. Beyond these refinements to improve pedagogy and user friendliness, the technical content of the book has been updated throughout, to reflect the ongoing changes in this ex- citing field.The most noteworthy changes are as follows: • Animation: Animation provides a powerful tool for understanding the complex mech- anisms of a modern OS.The sixth edition incorporates 16 separate animations covering such areas as scheduling, concurrency control, cache coherency, and process life cycle. At appropriate places in the book, the animations are highlighted so that the student can invoke the animation at the proper point in studying the book. • Windows Vista: Vista is Microsoft’s latest OS offering for PCs, workstations, and servers.The sixth edition provides details on Vista internals in all of the key technology areas covered in this book, including process/thread management, scheduling, memory management, security, file systems, and I/O. • Vista/Linux comparison: Throughout the book,Vista and Linux are used as examples of various aspects of OS internals. New to the sixth edition, each chapter that covers an aspect of Vista and Linux includes a sidebar comparing the technical approaches taken by these two operating systems. • Expanded coverage of security: Part Seven, Security, has been completely rewritten and expanded to two chapters. It is more detailed, covering a number of new topics. In addition, at key points in the book (Chapters 3, 7, and 12) there is an overview of secu- rity for the relevant topic. • Embedded operating systems: The sixth edition includes a new chapter on embedded operating systems. Embedded systems far outnumber general-purpose computing sys- tems and present of number of unique OS challenges. The chapter includes a discus- sion of common principles plus coverage of two example systems: TinyOS and eCos. • Concurrency: The material on concurrency has been expanded and revised for greater clarity. • Multiprocessor scheduling: A detailed real-world example of the design issues in mul- tiprocessor scheduling for game software has been added. With each new edition it is a struggle to maintain a reasonable page count while adding new material. In part this objective is realized by eliminating obsolete material and tighten- ing the narrative. For this edition, chapters and appendices that are of less general interest have been moved online, as individual PDF files. This has allowed an expansion of material without the corresponding increase in size and price. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This new edition has benefited from review by a number of people, who gave generously of their time and expertise. These include Archana Chidanandan (Rose-Hulman), Scott Stoller (SUNY–Stony Brook),Ziya Arnavut (SUNY–Fredonia),Sanjiv Bhatia (University of Missouri- St. Louis), Jayson Rock (University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee), Mark Mahoney (Carthage Col- lege, WI), Richard Smith (University of St. Thomas), Jeff Chastine (Clayton State University, GA), Tom Easton (Thomas College, ME), Che Dunren (Southern Illinois University), Dean

xviii PREFACE Mathias (Utah State University), Shavakant Mishra (University of Colorado), and Richard Reese (Tarleton State University), all of whom reviewed most or all of the book. Thanks also to the people who provided detailed reviews of a one or more chapters: Vijay Nyalpelli, John Traenky, James Hartley, Ajay Kumar (Symantec), Juergen Gross, Ma- neesh Singhal (Unix Kernel Professional in India), Yao Qi, Xie Yubo, Victor Cionca, Nikhil Bhargava, and Marcos Nagamura. I would also like to thank Dave Probert,Architect in the Windows Core Kernel & Archi- tecture team at Microsoft, for the review of the material on Windows Vista and for providing the comparisons of Linux and Vista; Tigran Aivazian, author of the Linux Kernel Internals document, which is part of the Linux Documentation Project, for the review of the material on Linux 2.6; Nick Garnett of eCosCentric, for the review of the material on eCos; and Philip Levis, one of the developers of TinyOS, for the review of the material on TinyOS. Brandon Ardiente and Tina Kouri, both at the Colorado School of Mines, developed the exercises that accompany the animations referenced in the book.Adam Critchley (Universi- ty of Texas at San Antonio) developed the simulation exercises. Matt Sparks (University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign) adapted a set of programming problems for use with this textbook. Lawrie Brown of the Australian Defence Force Academy produced the material on buffer overflow attacks. Ching-Kuang Shene (Michigan Tech University) provided the ex- amples used in the section on race conditions and reviewed the section.Tracy Camp and Keith Hellman, both at the Colorado School of Mines, developed a new set of homework problems. In addition, Fernando Ariel Gont contributed a number of homework problems; he also pro- vided detailed reviews of all of the chapters. I would also like to thank Bill Bynum (College of William and Mary) and Tracy Camp (Colorado School of Mines) for contributing Appendix G; Steve Taylor (Worcester Poly- technic Institute) for contributing the programming projects and reading/report assignments in the instructor’s manual; and Professor Tan N. Nguyen (George Mason University) for con- tributing the research projects in the instruction manual. Ian G Graham (Griffith University) contributed the two programming projects in the textbook. Oskars Rieksts (Kutztown Uni- versity) generously allowed me to make use of his lecture notes, quizzes, and projects. Finally, I would like to thank the many people responsible for the publication of the book, all of whom did their usual excellent job.This includes my editor Tracy Dunkelberger, her assistant Melinda Hagerty, production manager Rose Kernan, and supplements manager ReeAnne Davies. Also, Jake Warde of Warde Publishers managed the reviews; and Patricia M. Daly did the copy editing.

READER’S GUIDE 0.1 Outline of This Book 0.2 A Roadmap for Readers and Instructors 0.3 Internet and Web Resources Web Sites for This Book Other Web Sites USENET Newsgroups CHAPTER

CHAPTER 0 / READER’S GUIDE This book, with its accompanying Web site, covers a lot of material. Here we give the reader an overview. 0.1 OUTLINE OF THIS BOOK The book is organized in seven parts: Part One. Background: Provides an overview of computer architecture and or- ganization, with emphasis on topics that relate to operating system design, plus an overview of the operating system (OS) topics in remainder of the book. Part Two. Processes: Presents a detailed analysis of processes, multithreading, symmetric multiprocessing (SMP), and microkernels. This part also examines the key aspects of concurrency on a single system, with emphasis on issues of mutual exclusion and deadlock. Part Three. Memory: Provides a comprehensive survey of techniques for memory management, including virtual memory. Part Four. Scheduling: Provides a comparative discussion of various approaches to process scheduling.Thread scheduling, SMP scheduling, and real-time sched- uling are also examined. Part Five. Input/Output and Files: Examines the issues involved in OS control of the I/O function. Special attention is devoted to disk I/O, which is the key to system performance.Also provides an overview of file management. Part Six. Embedded Systems: Embedded systems far outnumber general- purpose computing systems and present of number of unique OS challenges. The chapter includes a discussion of common principles plus coverage of two example systems:TinyOS and eCos. Part Seven. Security: Provides a survey of threats and mechanisms for provid- ing computer and network security. Part Eight. Distributed Systems: Examines the major trends in the networking of computer systems, including TCP/IP, client/server computing, and clusters. Also describes some of the key design areas in the development of distributed operating systems. This text is intended to acquaint you with the design principles and implemen- tation issues of contemporary operating systems. Accordingly, a purely conceptual or theoretical treatment would be inadequate. To illustrate the concepts and to tie them to real-world design choices that must be made, two operating systems have been chosen as running examples: • Windows Vista: A multitasking operating system designed to run on a variety of PCs, workstations, and servers. It is one of the few recent commercial oper- ating systems that have essentially been designed from scratch.As such, it is in a position to incorporate in a clean fashion the latest developments in operat- ing system technology. • UNIX: A multitasking operating system originally intended for minicomputers but implemented on a wide range of machines from powerful microcomputers to supercomputers. Included under this topic is Linux.

0.2 / A ROADMAP FOR READERS AND INSTRUCTORS 3 The discussion of the example systems is distributed throughout the text rather than assembled as a single chapter or appendix.Thus, during the discussion of concurrency, the concurrency mechanisms of each example system are described, and the motivation for the individual design choices is discussed. With this ap- proach, the design concepts discussed in a given chapter are immediately reinforced with real-world examples. 0.2 A ROADMAP FOR READERS AND INSTRUCTORS It would be natural for the reader to question the particular ordering of topics pre- sented in this book. For example, the topic of scheduling (Chapters 9 and 10) is closely related to those of concurrency (Chapters 5 and 6) and the general topic of processes (Chapter 3) and might reasonably be covered immediately after those topics. The difficulty is that the various topics are highly interrelated. For example, in discussing virtual memory, it is useful to refer to the scheduling issues related to a page fault. Of course, it is also useful to refer to some memory management issues when dis- cussing scheduling decisions.This type of example can be repeated endlessly:A discus- sion of scheduling requires some understanding of I/O management and vice versa. Figure 0.1 suggests some of the important interrelationships between topics. The bold lines indicate very strong relationships, from the point of view of design and implementation decisions. Based on this diagram, it makes sense to begin with a Distributed systems Process description and control Scheduling Memory management Security Embedded systems Concurrency I/O and file Management Figure 0.1 OS Topics

CHAPTER 0 / READER’S GUIDE basic discussion of processes, which we do in Chapter 3. After that, the order is somewhat arbitrary. Many treatments of operating systems bunch all of the material on processes at the beginning and then deal with other topics.This is certainly valid. However, the central significance of memory management, which I believe is of equal importance to process management, has led to a decision to present this mate- rial prior to an in-depth look at scheduling. The ideal solution is for the student, after completing chapters 1 through 3 in series, to read and absorb the following chapters in parallel: 4 followed by (optional) 5; 6 followed by 7; 8 followed by (optional) 9; 10.The remaining Parts can be done in any order. However, although the human brain may engage in parallel processing, the human student finds it impossible (and expensive) to work successfully with four copies of the same book simultaneously open to four different chapters. Given the necessity for a linear ordering, I think that the ordering used in this book is the most effective. A final word. Chapter 2, especially Section 2.3, provides a top-level view of all of the key concepts covered in later chapters. Thus, after reading Chapter 2, there is considerable flexibility in choosing the order in which to read the remaining chapters. 0.3 INTERNET AND WEB RESOURCES There are a number of resources available on the Internet and the Web to support this book and to help one keep up with developments in this field. Web Sites for This Book A special Web page has been set up for this book at WilliamStallings.com/ OS/OS6e.html. See the layout at the beginning of this book for a detailed descrip- tion of that site. Of particular note are online documents available at the Web site for the student: • Pseudocode: For those readers not comfortable with C, all of the algorithms are also reproduced in a Pascal-like pseudocode. This pseudocode language is intuitive and particularly easy to follow. • Vista, UNIX, and Linux descriptions: As was mentioned, Windows and various flavors of UNIX are used as running case studies, with the discus- sion distributed throughout the text rather than assembled as a single chapter or appendix. Some readers would like to have all of this material in one place as a reference. Accordingly, all of the Windows, UNIX, and Linux material from the book is reproduced in three documents at the Web site. As soon as any typos or other errors are discovered, an errata list for this book will be available at the Web site. Please report any errors that you spot. Errata sheets for my other books are at WilliamStallings.com. I also maintain the Computer Science Student Resource Site,at WilliamStallings. com/StudentSupport.html. The purpose of this site is to provide documents, infor-

0.3 / INTERNET AND WEB RESOURCES 5 mation, and links for computer science students and professionals. Links and docu- ments are organized into six categories: • Math: Includes a basic math refresher, a queuing analysis primer, a number system primer, and links to numerous math sites. • How-to: Advice and guidance for solving homework problems, writing techni- cal reports, and preparing technical presentations. • Research resources: Links to important collections of papers, technical re- ports, and bibliographies. • Miscellaneous: A variety of useful documents and links. • Computer science careers: Useful links and documents for those considering a career in computer science. • Humor and other diversions: You have to take your mind off your work once in a while. Other Web Sites There are numerous Web sites that provide information related to the topics of this book. In subsequent chapters, pointers to specific Web sites can be found in the Recommended Reading and Web Sites section. Because the URL for a particular Web site may change, I have not included URLs in the book. For all of the Web sites listed in the book, the appropriate link can be found at this book’s Web site. Other links not mentioned in this book will be added to the Web site over time. USENET Newsgroups A number of USENET newsgroups are devoted to some aspect of operating sys- tems or to a particular operating system. As with virtually all USENET groups, there is a high noise-to-signal ratio, but it is worth experimenting to see if any meet your needs.The most relevant are as follows: • comp.os.research: The best group to follow. This is a moderated newsgroup that deals with research topics. • comp.os.misc: A general discussion of OS topics. • comp.unix.internals • comp.os.linux.development.system

PART ONE P art One provides a background and context for the remainder of this book. This part presents the fundamental concepts of computer architecture and operating system internals. ROAD MAP FOR PART ONE Chapter 1 Computer System Overview An operating system mediates among application programs, utilities, and users, on the one hand, and the computer system hardware on the other. To appreciate the functionality of the operating system and the design issues involved, one must have some appreciation for computer organization and architecture. Chapter 1 provides a brief survey of the processor, memory, and Input/Output (I/O) elements of a com- puter system. Chapter 2 Operating System Overview The topic of operating system (OS) design covers a huge territory, and it is easy to get lost in the details and lose the context of a discussion of a particular issue. Chapter 2 provides an overview to which the reader can return at any point in the book for context. We begin with a statement of the objectives and functions of an operating system. Then some historically important systems and OS functions are described. This discussion allows us to present some fundamental OS design princi- ples in a simple environment so that the relationship among various OS functions is clear.The chapter next highlights important characteristics of modern operating sys- tems. Throughout the book, as various topics are discussed, it is necessary to talk about both fundamental, well-established principles as well as more recent innova- tions in OS design. The discussion in this chapter alerts the reader to this blend of established and recent design approaches that must be addressed. Finally, we pre- sent an overview of Windows, UNIX, and Linux; this discussion establishes the gen- eral architecture of these systems, providing context for the detailed discussions to follow. Background

COMPUTER SYSTEM OVERVIEW 1.1 Basic Elements 1.2 Processor Registers User-Visible Registers Control and Status Registers 1.3 Instruction Execution Instruction Fetch and Execute I/O Function 1.4 Interrupts Interrupts and the Instruction Cycle Interrupt Processing Multiple Interrupts Multiprogramming 1.5 The Memory Hierarchy 1.6 Cache Memory Motivation Cache Principles Cache Design 1.7 I/O Communication Techniques Programmed I/O Interrupt-Driven I/O Direct Memory Access 1.8 Recommended Reading and Web Sites 1.9 Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems APPENDIX 1A Performance Characteristicd of Two-Level Memories Locality Operation of Two-Level Memory Performance APPENDIX 1B Procedure Control Stack Implementation Procedure Calls and Returns Reentrant Procedures CHAPTER

CHAPTER 1 / COMPUTER SYSTEM OVERVIEW An operating system (OS) exploits the hardware resources of one or more processors to provide a set of services to system users. The OS also manages secondary memory and I/O (input/output) devices on behalf of its users. Accordingly, it is important to have some understanding of the underlying computer system hardware before we begin our examination of operating systems. This chapter provides an overview of computer system hardware. In most areas, the survey is brief, as it is assumed that the reader is familiar with this subject. However, several areas are covered in some detail because of their importance to topics covered later in the book. 1.1 BASIC ELEMENTS At a top level, a computer consists of processor, memory, and I/O components, with one or more modules of each type. These components are interconnected in some fashion to achieve the main function of the computer, which is to execute programs. Thus, there are four main structural elements: • Processor: Controls the operation of the computer and performs its data pro- cessing functions. When there is only one processor, it is often referred to as the central processing unit (CPU). • Main memory: Stores data and programs. This memory is typically volatile; that is, when the computer is shut down, the contents of the memory are lost. In contrast, the contents of disk memory are retained even when the computer system is shut down.Main memory is also referred to as real memory or primary memory. • I/O modules: Move data between the computer and its external environ- ment. The external environment consists of a variety of devices, including secondary memory devices (e. g., disks), communications equipment, and terminals. • System bus: Provides for communication among processors, main memory, and I/O modules. Figure 1.1 depicts these top-level components. One of the processor’s func- tions is to exchange data with memory. For this purpose, it typically makes use of two internal (to the processor) registers: a memory address register (MAR), which specifies the address in memory for the next read or write; and a memory buffer reg- ister (MBR), which contains the data to be written into memory or which receives the data read from memory. Similarly, an I/O address register (I/OAR) specifies a particular I/O device. An I/O buffer register (I/OBR) is used for the exchange of data between an I/O module and the processor. A memory module consists of a set of locations, defined by sequentially num- bered addresses. Each location contains a bit pattern that can be interpreted as ei- ther an instruction or data. An I/O module transfers data from external devices to processor and memory, and vice versa. It contains internal buffers for temporarily holding data until they can be sent on.

1.2 / PROCESSOR REGISTERS 9 1.2 PROCESSOR REGISTERS A processor includes a set of registers that provide memory that is faster and smaller than main memory. Processor registers serve two functions: • User-visible registers: Enable the machine or assembly language programmer to minimize main memory references by optimizing register use. For high- level languages, an optimizing compiler will attempt to make intelligent choices of which variables to assign to registers and which to main memory locations. Some high-level languages, such as C, allow the programmer to sug- gest to the compiler which variables should be held in registers. • Control and status registers: Used by the processor to control the operation of the processor and by privileged OS routines to control the execution of programs. Figure 1.1 Computer Components: Top-Level View CPU Main memory System bus I/O module Buffers Instruction n2 n1 Data Data Data Data Instruction Instruction PC  Program counter IR  Instruction register MAR  Memory address register MBR  Memory buffer register I/O AR  Input/output address register I/O BR  Input/output buffer register PC MAR IR MBR I/O AR I/O BR Execution unit

CHAPTER 1 / COMPUTER SYSTEM OVERVIEW There is not a clean separation of registers into these two categories. For example, on some processors, the program counter is user visible, but on many it is not. For purposes of the following discussion, however, it is convenient to use these categories. User-Visible Registers A user-visible register may be referenced by means of the machine language that the processor executes and is generally available to all programs, including application programs as well as system programs. Types of registers that are typically available are data, address, and condition code registers. Data registers can be assigned to a variety of functions by the programmer. In some cases, they are general purpose in nature and can be used with any machine in- struction that performs operations on data. Often, however, there are restrictions. For example, there may be dedicated registers for floating-point operations and oth- ers for integer operations. Address registers contain main memory addresses of data and instructions, or they contain a portion of the address that is used in the calculation of the complete or effective address. These registers may themselves be general purpose, or may be devoted to a particular way, or mode, of addressing memory. Examples include the following: • Index register: Indexed addressing is a common mode of addressing that in- volves adding an index to a base value to get the effective address. • Segment pointer: With segmented addressing, memory is divided into segments, which are variable-length blocks of words.1 A memory reference consists of a reference to a particular segment and an offset within the segment; this mode of addressing is important in our discussion of memory management in Chapter 7. In this mode of addressing, a register is used to hold the base address (starting location) of the segment. There may be multiple registers; for example, one for the OS (i.e., when OS code is executing on the processor) and one for the cur- rently executing application. • Stack pointer: If there is user-visible stack2 addressing, then there is a dedi- cated register that points to the top of the stack.This allows the use of instruc- tions that contain no address field, such as push and pop. For some processors, a procedure call will result in automatic saving of all user- visible registers, to be restored on return. Saving and restoring is performed by the processor as part of the execution of the call and return instructions.This allows each 1There is no universal definition of the term word. In general, a word is an ordered set of bytes or bits that is the normal unit in which information may be stored, transmitted, or operated on within a given com- puter. Typically, if a processor has a fixed-length instruction set, then the instruction length equals the word length. 2A stack is located in main memory and is a sequential set of locations that are referenced similarly to a physical stack of papers, by putting on and taking away from the top. See Appendix 1B for a discussion of stack processing.

1.2 / PROCESSOR REGISTERS 11 procedure to use these registers independently. On other processors, the program- mer must save the contents of the relevant user-visible registers prior to a procedure call, by including instructions for this purpose in the program. Thus, the saving and restoring functions may be performed in either hardware or software, depending on the processor. Control and Status Registers A variety of processor registers are employed to control the operation of the processor. On most processors, most of these are not visible to the user. Some of them may be accessible by machine instructions executed in what is referred to as a control or kernel mode. Of course, different processors will have different register organizations and use different terminology. We provide here a reasonably complete list of register types, with a brief description. In addition to the MAR, MBR, I/OAR, and I/OBR registers mentioned earlier (Figure 1.1), the following are essential to instruction execution: • Program counter (PC): Contains the address of the next instruction to be fetched • Instruction register (IR): Contains the instruction most recently fetched All processor designs also include a register or set of registers, often known as the program status word (PSW), that contains status information.The PSW typically contains condition codes plus other status information, such as an interrupt enable/disable bit and a kernel/user mode bit. Condition codes (also referred to as flags) are bits typically set by the proces- sor hardware as the result of operations. For example, an arithmetic operation may produce a positive, negative, zero, or overflow result. In addition to the result itself being stored in a register or memory, a condition code is also set following the exe- cution of the arithmetic instruction.The condition code may subsequently be tested as part of a conditional branch operation. Condition code bits are collected into one or more registers. Usually, they form part of a control register. Generally, machine instructions allow these bits to be read by implicit reference, but they cannot be al- tered by explicit reference because they are intended for feedback regarding the re- sults of instruction execution. In processors with multiple types of interrupts, a set of interrupt registers may be provided, with one pointer to each interrupt-handling routine. If a stack is used to implement certain functions (e. g., procedure call), then a stack pointer is needed (see Appendix 1B). Memory management hardware, discussed in Chapter 7, requires dedicated registers. Finally, registers may be used in the control of I/O operations. A number of factors go into the design of the control and status register orga- nization. One key issue is OS support. Certain types of control information are of specific utility to the OS. If the processor designer has a functional understanding of the OS to be used,then the register organization can be designed to provide hardware support for particular features such as memory protection and switching between user programs.

CHAPTER 1 / COMPUTER SYSTEM OVERVIEW Another key design decision is the allocation of control information between registers and memory. It is common to dedicate the first (lowest) few hundred or thousand words of memory for control purposes. The designer must decide how much control information should be in more expensive, faster registers and how much in less expensive, slower main memory. 1.3 INSTRUCTION EXECUTION A program to be executed by a processor consists of a set of instructions stored in memory. In its simplest form, instruction processing consists of two steps: The processor reads (fetches) instructions from memory one at a time and executes each instruction. Program execution consists of repeating the process of instruction fetch and instruction execution. Instruction execution may involve several operations and depends on the nature of the instruction. The processing required for a single instruction is called an instruction cycle. Using a simplified two-step description, the instruction cycle is depicted in Figure 1.2. The two steps are referred to as the fetch stage and the execute stage. Program execu- tion halts only if the processor is turned off, some sort of unrecoverable error occurs, or a program instruction that halts the processor is encountered. Instruction Fetch and Execute At the beginning of each instruction cycle, the processor fetches an instruction from memory. Typically, the program counter (PC) holds the address of the next instruc- tion to be fetched. Unless instructed otherwise, the processor always increments the PC after each instruction fetch so that it will fetch the next instruction in sequence (i.e., the instruction located at the next higher memory address). For example, con- sider a simplified computer in which each instruction occupies one 16-bit word of memory.Assume that the program counter is set to location 300.The processor will next fetch the instruction at location 300. On succeeding instruction cycles, it will fetch instructions from locations 301, 302, 303, and so on. This sequence may be al- tered, as explained subsequently. The fetched instruction is loaded into the instruction register (IR). The in- struction contains bits that specify the action the processor is to take.The processor interprets the instruction and performs the required action. In general, these actions fall into four categories: • Processor-memory: Data may be transferred from processor to memory or from memory to processor. Figure 1.2 Basic Instruction Cycle START HALT Fetch next instruction Fetch stage Execute stage Execute instruction

1.3 / INSTRUCTION EXECUTION 13 • Processor-I/O: Data may be transferred to or from a peripheral device by transferring between the processor and an I/O module. • Data processing: The processor may perform some arithmetic or logic opera- tion on data. • Control: An instruction may specify that the sequence of execution be altered. For example, the processor may fetch an instruction from location 149, which specifies that the next instruction be from location 182.The processor sets the program counter to 182. Thus, on the next fetch stage, the instruction will be fetched from location 182 rather than 150. An instruction’s execution may involve a combination of these actions. Consider a simple example using a hypothetical processor that includes the characteristics listed in Figure 1.3. The processor contains a single data register, called the accumulator (AC). Both instructions and data are 16 bits long, and memory is organized as a sequence of 16-bit words. The instruction format pro- vides 4 bits for the opcode, allowing as many as 24  16 different opcodes (repre- sented by a single hexadecimal3 digit). The opcode defines the operation the processor is to perform.With the remaining 12 bits of the instruction format, up to 212  4096 (4 K) words of memory (denoted by three hexadecimal digits) can be directly addressed. 3 4 Opcode Address S Magnitude Program counter (PC) = Address of instruction Instruction register (IR) = Instruction being executed Accumulator (AC) = Temporary storage (a) Instruction format (b) Integer format (c) Internal CPU registers 0001 = Load AC from memory 0010 = Store AC to memory 0101 = Add to AC from memory (d) Partial list of opcodes Figure 1.3 Characteristics of a Hypothetical Machine 3A basic refresher on number systems (decimal, binary, hexadecimal) can be found at the Computer Sci- ence Student Resource Site at WilliamStallings. com/StudentSupport.html.

CHAPTER 1 / COMPUTER SYSTEM OVERVIEW Figure 1.4 illustrates a partial program execution, showing the relevant por- tions of memory and processor registers. The program fragment shown adds the contents of the memory word at address 940 to the contents of the memory word at address 941 and stores the result in the latter location.Three instructions, which can be described as three fetch and three execute stages, are required: 1. The PC contains 300, the address of the first instruction. This instruction (the value 1940 in hexadecimal) is loaded into the IR and the PC is incremented. Note that this process involves the use of a memory address register (MAR) and a memory buffer register (MBR). For simplicity, these intermediate registers are not shown. 2. The first 4 bits (first hexadecimal digit) in the IR indicate that the AC is to be loaded from memory. The remaining 12 bits (three hexadecimal digits) specify the address, which is 940. 3. The next instruction (5941) is fetched from location 301 and the PC is incremented. 4. The old contents of the AC and the contents of location 941 are added and the result is stored in the AC. 5. The next instruction (2941) is fetched from location 302 and the PC is incremented. 6. The contents of the AC are stored in location 941. PC CPU registers Memory Fetch stage Execute stage 3 0 0 1 9 4 0 301 5 9 4 1 302 2 9 4 1 940 0 0 0 3 941 0 0 0 2 AC IR 1 9 4 0 Step 1 PC CPU registers Memory 3 0 1 1 9 4 0 301 5 9 4 1 302 2 9 4 1 940 0 0 0 3 941 0 0 0 2 AC IR 1 9 4 0 0 0 0 3 Step 2 PC CPU registers Memory 3 0 1 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 5 1 9 4 0 301 5 9 4 1 302 2 9 4 1 940 0 0 0 3 941 0 0 0 2 AC IR 5 9 4 1 Step 3 PC CPU registers Memory 3 0 2 1 9 4 0 301 5 9 4 1 302 2 9 4 1 940 0 0 0 3 941 0 0 0 2 AC IR 5 9 4 1 Step 4 PC CPU registers Memory 3 0 1 9 4 0 301 5 9 4 1 302 2 9 4 1 940 0 0 0 3 941 0 0 0 2 AC IR 2 9 4 1 Step 5 PC CPU registers Memory 3 0 3 1 9 4 0 301 5 9 4 1 302 2 9 4 1 940 0 0 0 3 941 0 0 0 5 AC IR 2 9 4 1 Step 6 3 + 2 = 5 Figure 1.4 Example of Program Execution (contents of memory and registers in hexadecimal)

1.4 / INTERRUPTS 15 In this example, three instruction cycles, each consisting of a fetch stage and an execute stage, are needed to add the contents of location 940 to the contents of 941. With a more complex set of instructions, fewer instruction cycles would be needed. Most modern processors include instructions that contain more than one address. Thus the execution stage for a particular instruction may involve more than one ref- erence to memory. Also, instead of memory references, an instruction may specify an I/O operation. I/O Function Data can be exchanged directly between an I/O module (e. g., a disk controller) and the processor. Just as the processor can initiate a read or write with memory, speci- fying the address of a memory location, the processor can also read data from or write data to an I/O module. In this latter case, the processor identifies a specific de- vice that is controlled by a particular I/O module.Thus, an instruction sequence sim- ilar in form to that of Figure 1.4 could occur, with I/O instructions rather than memory-referencing instructions. In some cases, it is desirable to allow I/O exchanges to occur directly with main memory to relieve the processor of the I/O task. In such a case, the processor grants to an I/O module the authority to read from or write to memory, so that the I/O- memory transfer can occur without tying up the processor. During such a transfer, the I/O module issues read or write commands to memory, relieving the processor of responsibility for the exchange. This operation, known as direct memory access (DMA), is examined later in this chapter. 1.4 INTERRUPTS Virtually all computers provide a mechanism by which other modules (I/O, memory) may interrupt the normal sequencing of the processor. Table 1.1 lists the most com- mon classes of interrupts. Interrupts are provided primarily as a way to improve processor utilization. For example, most I/O devices are much slower than the processor. Suppose that the processor is transferring data to a printer using the instruction cycle scheme of Figure 1.2. After each write operation, the processor must pause and remain idle Table 1.1 Classes of Interrupts Program Generated by some condition that occurs as a result of an instruction execution, such as arithmetic overflow, division by zero, attempt to execute an illegal machine instruction, and reference outside a user’s allowed memory space. Timer Generated by a timer within the processor.This allows the operating system to perform certain functions on a regular basis. I/O Generated by an I/O controller, to signal normal completion of an operation or to signal a variety of error conditions. Hardware failure Generated by a failure, such as power failure or memory parity error.

CHAPTER 1 / COMPUTER SYSTEM OVERVIEW until the printer catches up. The length of this pause may be on the order of many thousands or even millions of instruction cycles. Clearly, this is a very wasteful use of the processor. To give a specific example, consider a PC that operates at 1 GHz, which would allow roughly 109 instructions per second.4 A typical hard disk has a rotational speed of 7200 revolutions per minute for a half-track rotation time of 4 ms, which is 4 million times slower than the processor. Figure 1.5a illustrates this state of affairs. The user program performs a series of WRITE calls interleaved with processing. The solid vertical lines represent seg- ments of code in a program. Code segments 1, 2, and 3 refer to sequences of instruc- tions that do not involve I/O.The WRITE calls are to an I/O routine that is a system utility and that will perform the actual I/O operation. The I/O program consists of three sections: • A sequence of instructions, labeled 4 in the figure, to prepare for the actual I/O operation.This may include copying the data to be output into a special buffer and preparing the parameters for a device command. • The actual I/O command. Without the use of interrupts, once this command is issued, the program must wait for the I/O device to perform the requested User program WRITE WRITE WRITE I/O program I/O Command END (a) No interrupts User program WRITE WRITE WRITE I/O program I/O Command Interrupt handler END 2a 2b 3a 3b (b) Interrupts; short I/O wait User program WRITE WRITE WRITE I/O program I/O Command Interrupt handler END (c) Interrupts; long I/O wait Figure 1.5 Program Flow of Control without and with Interrupts 4A discussion of the uses of numerical prefixes, such as giga and tera, is contained in a supporting docu- ment at the Computer Science Student Resource Site at WilliamStallings. com/StudentSupport.html.

1.4 / INTERRUPTS 17 function (or periodically check the status, or poll, the I/O device).The program might wait by simply repeatedly performing a test operation to determine if the I/O operation is done. • A sequence of instructions, labeled 5 in the figure, to complete the operation. This may include setting a flag indicating the success or failure of the operation. The dashed line represents the path of execution followed by the processor; that is, this line shows the sequence in which instructions are executed.Thus, after the first WRITE instruction is encountered, the user program is interrupted and execution continues with the I/O program.After the I/O program execution is complete, execu- tion resumes in the user program immediately following the WRITE instruction. Because the I/O operation may take a relatively long time to complete, the I/O program is hung up waiting for the operation to complete; hence, the user program is stopped at the point of the WRITE call for some considerable period of time. Interrupts and the Instruction Cycle With interrupts, the processor can be engaged in executing other instructions while an I/O operation is in progress. Consider the flow of control in Figure 1.5b. As before, the user program reaches a point at which it makes a system call in the form of a WRITE call. The I/O program that is invoked in this case consists only of the preparation code and the actual I/O command.After these few instructions have been executed, control returns to the user program. Meanwhile, the external device is busy accepting data from computer memory and printing it.This I/O op- eration is conducted concurrently with the execution of instructions in the user program. When the external device becomes ready to be serviced, that is, when it is ready to accept more data from the processor, the I/O module for that external de- vice sends an interrupt request signal to the processor. The processor responds by suspending operation of the current program; branching off to a routine to service that particular I/O device, known as an interrupt handler; and resuming the original execution after the device is serviced. The points at which such interrupts occur are indicated by in Figure 1.5b. Note that an interrupt can occur at any point in the main program, not just at one specific instruction. For the user program, an interrupt suspends the normal sequence of execu- tion. When the interrupt processing is completed, execution resumes (Figure 1.6). Thus, the user program does not have to contain any special code to accommodate interrupts; the processor and the OS are responsible for suspending the user pro- gram and then resuming it at the same point. To accommodate interrupts, an interrupt stage is added to the instruction cycle, as shown in Figure 1.7 (compare Figure 1.2). In the interrupt stage, the processor checks to see if any interrupts have occurred, indicated by the presence of an interrupt signal. If no interrupts are pending, the processor proceeds to the fetch stage and fetches the next instruction of the current program. If an interrupt is pending, the processor suspends execution of the current program and executes an interrupt-handler routine. The interrupt-handler routine is generally part of the OS. Typically, this routine determines the nature of the interrupt and performs

CHAPTER 1 / COMPUTER SYSTEM OVERVIEW whatever actions are needed. In the example we have been using, the handler de- termines which I/O module generated the interrupt and may branch to a program that will write more data out to that I/O module. When the interrupt-handler rou- tine is completed, the processor can resume execution of the user program at the point of interruption. It is clear that there is some overhead involved in this process. Extra instructions must be executed (in the interrupt handler) to determine the nature of the interrupt and to decide on the appropriate action. Nevertheless, because of the relatively large amount of time that would be wasted by simply waiting on an I/O operation, the processor can be employed much more efficiently with the use of interrupts. Fetch stage Execute stage Interrupt stage START HALT Interrupts disabled Interrupts enabled Fetch next instruction Execute instruction Check for interrupt; initiate interrupt handler Figure 1.7 Instruction Cycle with Interrupts i i  1 M Interrupt occurs here User program Interrupt handler Figure 1.6 Transfer of Control via Interrupts

1.4 / INTERRUPTS 19 To appreciate the gain in efficiency, consider Figure 1.8, which is a timing dia- gram based on the flow of control in Figures 1.5 a and 1.5b. Figures 1.5b and 1.8 as- sume that the time required for the I/O operation is relatively short: less than the time to complete the execution of instructions between write operations in the user program.The more typical case, especially for a slow device such as a printer, is that the I/O operation will take much more time than executing a sequence of user in- structions. Figure 1.5 c indicates this state of affairs. In this case, the user program reaches the second WRITE call before the I/O operation spawned by the first call is complete.The result is that the user program is hung up at that point.When the pre- ceding I/O operation is completed, this new WRITE call may be processed, and a new I/O operation may be started. Figure 1.9 shows the timing for this situation with and without the use of interrupts.We can see that there is still a gain in efficiency be- cause part of the time during which the I/O operation is underway overlaps with the execution of user instructions. Processor wait Processor wait Time I/O operation I/O operation I/O operation I/O operation 2a 2b 3a 3b (a) Without interrupts (circled numbers refer to numbers in Figure 1.5a) (b) With interrupts (circled numbers refer to numbers in Figure 1.5b) Figure 1.8 Program Timing: Short I/O Wait

CHAPTER 1 / COMPUTER SYSTEM OVERVIEW Interrupt Processing An interrupt triggers a number of events, both in the processor hardware and in software. Figure 1.10 shows a typical sequence. When an I/O device completes an I/O operation, the following sequence of hardware events occurs: 1. The device issues an interrupt signal to the processor. 2. The processor finishes execution of the current instruction before responding to the interrupt, as indicated in Figure 1.7. 3. The processor tests for a pending interrupt request, determines that there is one, and sends an acknowledgment signal to the device that issued the interrupt.The acknowledgment allows the device to remove its interrupt signal. Processor wait Processor wait Processor wait (a) Without interrupts (circled numbers refer to numbers in Figure 1.5a) (b) With interrupts (circled numbers refer to numbers in Figure 1.5c) Processor wait I/O operation I/O operation I/O operation I/O operation Time Figure 1.9 Program Timing: Long I/O Wait

1.4 / INTERRUPTS 21 4. The processor next needs to prepare to transfer control to the interrupt routine. To begin, it saves information needed to resume the current program at the point of interrupt. The minimum information required is the program status word (PSW) and the location of the next instruction to be executed, which is contained in the program counter.These can be pushed onto a control stack (see Appendix 1B). 5. The processor then loads the program counter with the entry location of the interrupt-handling routine that will respond to this interrupt. Depending on the computer architecture and OS design, there may be a single program, one for each type of interrupt, or one for each device and each type of inter- rupt. If there is more than one interrupt-handling routine, the processor must determine which one to invoke. This information may have been in- cluded in the original interrupt signal, or the processor may have to issue a request to the device that issued the interrupt to get a response that contains the needed information. Once the program counter has been loaded, the processor proceeds to the next instruction cycle, which begins with an instruction fetch. Because the instruction fetch is determined by the contents of the program counter, control is transferred to Device controller or other system hardware issues an interrupt Processor finishes execution of current instruction Processor signals